WASHINGTON — For more than a year, a federal inquiry of Mayor Vincent C. Gray’s 2010 election campaign has smoldered in the nation’s capital. After raids and subpoenas, intrigue flared and receded. Through it all, rumors swirled around the secret work of a grand jury.
On Tuesday, the investigation roared back into the public eye when Thomas W. Gore, a former campaign fund-raiser for Mr. Gray, pleaded guilty in a plea deal to obstruction of justice and violations of the city’s campaign finance laws. The charges are the first in the investigation of Mr. Gray’s campaign, but many in the city predict more to come.
The re-emergence of the case — in which Gray campaign officials are suspected of having made improper payments to another mayoral candidate to undermine their principal opponent — comes as little surprise to dismayed observers of the city government, who have been watching this investigation and others involving accusations of corruption and pay-to-play politics.
“It does not sound like it is over — and that’s a shame, because we need to clear the air and clear this case off the books, and we need to set our government on the right course,” said Anne Renshaw, president of the Federation of Citizens Associations of the District of Columbia.
Mr. Gore’s guilty pleas indicate more trouble for Mr. Gray, given that Mr. Gore is a longtime associate of the mayor and was his chief fund-raiser in his 2004 City Council race and his 2006 bid for council chairman. Under the plea deal, Mr. Gore is required to cooperate with prosecutors.
Mr. Gray’s office referred questions to the mayor’s private lawyer, Robert S. Bennett. Mr. Bennett declined to comment.
United States Attorney Ronald C. Machen Jr. said in a statement that the district’s voters were deceived in the election and that the case demonstrated “how hard it is to bury the truth forever.” “Envelopes stuffed with fraudulent money orders prevented the public from knowing that one mayoral campaign was secretly financing the campaign of an opposing candidate.” Mr. Machen said.
The charges against Mr. Gore — three violations of city campaign finance laws and a federal obstruction of justice charge — came to light on Monday in a brief court filing that was a precursor to his pleas on Tuesday.
The charges brought into sharp focus Mr. Gore’s attempt to cover up efforts by Mr. Gray’s campaign to undermine his chief opponent, Adrian M. Fenty, the incumbent mayor.
With a slogan of “One City” and a promise to continue the city’s progress, Mr. Gray won the race, but the euphoria was short-lived. Several months after his election, a minor candidate in the race came forward with accusations that set the federal inquiry in motion and led to the charges against Mr. Gore.
The candidate, Sulaimon Brown, claimed that the Gray campaign had paid him to publicly attack Mr. Fenty and that he was offered a job in the Gray administration. He did receive a $110,000 job in the government, but he was eventually fired.
Mr. Gray, who is referred to as “Candidate A” in the court papers, has denied that there was a quid pro quo with Mr. Brown, who is called “Candidate B.” Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly of Federal District Court asked Mr. Gore to identify Candidate B, and he said it was Mr. Brown.
According to prosecutors, Mr. Gore and an unnamed campaign official for Mr. Gray executed a plan to secretly pay Mr. Brown to stay in the race and continue his attacks on Mr. Fenty. The documents do not specify who came up with the plan or whether Mr. Gray knew about it.
To funnel the money to Mr. Brown, prosecutors said, Mr. Gore gave blank money orders totaling $660 to the other campaign official. The campaign official then wrote in the names of friends and family members and gave the money orders to Mr. Brown, they said; Mr. Gore kept track of the payments in a spiral-bound notebook.
When the scheme came to light in The Washington Post early last year, Mr. Gore shredded the notebook. When he was called for an interview with the F.B.I. in October, prosecutors said, he lied to agents about recording the payments and about when he destroyed the notebook, saying he got rid of it after the general election.
After entering his pleas on Tuesday, Mr. Gore hugged supporters who had been in the audience and then walked with his lawyer through a crowd of reporters without comment. A sentencing date has not been set; under the plea deal, Mr. Gore could face 12 to 18 months in prison and fines up to $30,000.
Mr. Gore’s payments are not the only alleged impropriety in the campaign. Federal agents recently raided the home and office of a Gray supporter who is suspected of financing an off-the-books shadow campaign. And Mr. Gray has had to defend administration hires of political allies and their children since his election.
