WASHINGTON — Forget hope and change.
After months of planning, President Obama’s media team has prepared an aggressive strategy to portray Mitt Romney as insensitive to the plight of working people and beholden to powerful interests. They have researched possible lines of attack and drafted language that can be dropped into an advertisement at a moment’s notice.
Campaign advisers said they were willing to commit a considerable chunk of their advertising budget — expected to be the largest any presidential campaign has ever seen — to broadcasting these attacks.
The work of the Obama message machine, a half-dozen outside advertising firms and in-house campaign strategists, is already on vivid display. In their ads, Web videos and online features, the president wants to thwart the influence of “big oil”; Mr. Romney cashes their campaign checks. The president saved hundreds of thousands of jobs by rescuing the auto industry; Mr. Romney shipped jobs overseas. “It’s just what you expect from a guy who had a Swiss bank account,” one ad says.
At the center of this effort is Jim Margolis, and his job is to make you think of call centers in India every time you hear Mr. Romney’s name.
With a reporter in his studio on a recent afternoon, an unassuming Mr. Margolis seemed harmless enough as he leaned back in a swivel chair and suggested a few revisions to a video he was editing with his staff. Their work that day would become part of the $25 million advertising blitz the Obama campaign kicked off this week.
Strip a few data points out of the script, he said; too many numbers might confuse people. Swap out a clip of a smiling family and replace it with a father and son playing baseball; it will look less staged.
But Mr. Margolis did not become a top chef in what Mr. Romney calls the president’s “hell’s kitchen” of negative ads based solely on his eye for a pretty picture and his flair for boiling down a good résumé in 30 seconds.
His past work shows why he is such an indispensable part of Mr. Obama’s media team. In the 2008 presidential campaign, Mr. Margolis produced a commercial that repeated John McCain’s ill-advised assertion “the fundamentals of our economy are strong” over and over, helping to sear the phrase into voters’ minds as the economy imploded that fall.
Two years later, he helped Senator Barbara Boxer of California win re-election against Carly Fiorina, the Republican nominee and former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard, with ads that showed Ms. Fiorina being ushered into a chauffeured car as an aide held the door. One of them reminded voters, “While Californians lost their jobs, Fiorina tripled her salary, bought a million-dollar yacht and five corporate jets.”
Mr. Margolis, 57, maintains a low profile in a presidential inner circle filled with advisers who write books and appear regularly on “Meet the Press” — the antithesis of a flamboyant adman. His lack of visibility belies his influence in Democratic circles, where he first surfaced as a 23-year-old Congressional chief of staff in the 1980s. A contemplative man with silver hair, large blue eyes and a low, gravely voice, he has served as a close adviser to a host of top Democrats, including Senators Harry Reid, Max Baucus and Mark Warner.
As a debate coach, he once made Mrs. Boxer so angry during a prep session (he stood in very convincingly as Ms. Fiorina) that she had to take a walk outside to calm down. He still travels to Capitol Hill almost every Tuesday to offer strategic advice to Mr. Reid, who says of him, “He’s very good at making you feel you’re better than you are.”
If you live in a state where a presidential contest has been close at some point in the last 20 years, you have probably seen one of Mr. Margolis’s ads. During the 2004 Democratic primaries, Mr. Margolis’s commercials featuring Senator John Kerry’s crewmates from Vietnam recalling his heroism were credited with helping him win the nomination.
Mr. Margolis and his firm, GMMB, first produced ads for Mr. Obama in 2007, and their work quickly stood out for its subtle edge.
Using video from one of Mr. Obama’s speeches in Iowa, he created a gauzy 60-second commercial that made Hillary Rodham Clinton sound irrelevant with a line that never even mentioned her: “The same old Washington textbook campaigns just won’t do it.”
“It was a beautiful spot,” said Mandy Grunwald, who was a senior strategist for Mrs. Clinton at the time. “Everybody knew who he was talking about.”
The ad’s potency speaks to a fact about Mr. Obama’s 2008 campaign that often goes overlooked. That year he ran more negative ads than any other candidate in history, according to the Wisconsin Advertising Project, a nonpartisan political research group.
Mr. McCain was depicted in some commercials as out of touch and feeble. One recalled him saying that he could not remember how many houses he owned. “Well, it’s seven,” the announcer said dismissively.
The Obama campaign acknowledges that fiercely attacking Mr. Romney has risks.
“Tonally we have to be very careful about the fact that the president does have standards and does have a brand that he feels strongly about,” said David Axelrod, Mr. Obama’s senior strategist. “I think it’s possible to be tough and also fair, tough and also factual. And that’s what we’re going to do. But rest assured, we will be responding when we are being attacked.”
Putting the efforts to define Mr. Romney aside, the Obama campaign faces problems with its own message. One big challenge that Mr. Margolis acknowledged is conveying optimism about the country’s progress without seeming tone deaf to the struggles that many Americans still face.
“If your house is under water or you can’t make your car payment, I’m not going to convince you that everything is O.K.,” Mr. Margolis said.
But after he pointed out some of the president’s signature accomplishments, like the auto industry bailout, he added, “While none of us should diminish the hardships, we also shouldn’t be shy about telling the story of what this president is accomplishing.”
Not that Mr. Margolis has ever held back.
In the 2010 Boxer race, he sent a film crew to California to interview workers who were laid off by Ms. Fiorina.
“Fiorina never cared about our jobs. Not then. Not now,” said one of the workers, his voice ringing with indignation.
Mr. Margolis also created a series of commercials that year for Mr. Reid using ordinary citizens to criticize Sharron Angle, his Tea Party-backed opponent, as reckless and erratic.
In one ad, a Republican who is a member of the National Rifle Association said of Ms. Angle’s position on guns, “It’s crazy.” What was most damning went left unsaid: the suggestion that he was speaking about Ms. Angle herself.
Mr. Margolis declined to discuss any ads in the works for the Obama campaign. But his advice to Mrs. Boxer in 2010 may offer a hint of what is to come.
“He would always say, ‘Barbara, this is a race between two choices,’ ” Mrs. Boxer said in an interview. “ ‘And you need to remind people that you’re running against someone who shipped tens of thousands of jobs overseas and made her success by stepping over other people. You can never forget that.’ ”
