The Obama campaign on Tuesday released a 30-second advertisement, “Swiss Bank Account,” that combines a rebuttal of a conservative group’s recent anti-Obama ad with a slam at Mitt Romney, the likely Republican nominee. Mr. Romney’s record of cutting and outsourcing jobs as a businessman and Massachusetts governor, the ad charges, “is just what you’d expect from a guy who had a Swiss bank account.” The Obama ad will run in three battleground states — Ohio, Virginia and Iowa — where the anti-Obama ad has also appeared.
THE SCRIPT The ad begins with a man’s emphatic voice reading quotes that appear on screen — “over the top,” “erroneous,” “out of context” — to describe the anti-Obama ad. The narrator counters, “President Obama’s clean energy initiatives have helped create jobs for projects across America, not overseas.” The narrator quickly asks, “What about Mitt Romney?” and answers, “As a corporate C.E.O., he shipped American jobs to places like Mexico and China. As governor, he outsourced state jobs to a call center in India. He’s still pushing tax breaks for companies that ship jobs overseas.” The ad ends with the line about the Swiss bank account.
ON THE SCREEN Whenever the narrator talks about Mr. Romney or big oil, the screen has a black background. First, the ad shows a small, anti-Obama video clip, and alongside are the narrator’s words, in white type, rebutting it. Then the words “Big Oil’s New Attack Ad” whip over the video clip, covering much of it. The screen briefly turns a more pleasing light blue: A color photo of a determined-looking Mr. Obama is next to a map of the United States under the words “Jobs created by President Obama’s clean energy initiatives.” The map fills with circles denoting locations of job-creating projects. Back to black, as the phrase “What about Mitt Romney?” is followed by black-and-white photos of the candidate. Beneath the phrase “The Romney Record” are phrases about shipping jobs overseas (on a global map, Mexico and China suddenly pop out in red); outsourcing Massachusetts jobs (a photo of the Massachusetts State House switches to one of India’s Taj Mahal); and supporting tax breaks for outsourcing companies (a photo appears of an abandoned plant). Throughout the ad, in small type, are news media citations supporting its assertions.
ACCURACY The Obama campaign provided additional citations from news media and fact-checking groups to vouch for the ad’s content. Those sources have repeatedly assailed the statements in the recent ads from two Republican-led groups, Americans for Prosperity and the Iowa-based American Future Fund, as falsehoods. The ad’s assertion that “big oil” is behind such attack ads is based on the fact that Americans for Prosperity receives some money from Charles and David Koch, who are oil billionaires. The statements about Mr. Romney’s jobs record are drawn from past coverage of his career as governor and at the private equity firm Bain Capital. While the Obama ad makes a big deal of Mr. Romney’s Swiss bank account, it is careful to use the word “had” — the account was closed as Mr. Romney began his run for president. JACKIE CALMES
