WASHINGTON — The top Environmental Protection Agency official in Texas has resigned over a two-year-old video circulated by Congressional Republicans of a speech in which he declared that the agency should hit polluters with its full powers, citing the Roman practice of crucifying enemies as a deterrent.
Al Armendariz, who oversaw federal environmental enforcement in five states, offered his resignation on Sunday in a letter to Lisa P. Jackson, the E.P.A. administrator, saying he regretted his comments and did not want to jeopardize the agency’s mission. Senior agency officials had upbraided Dr. Armendariz, who holds a doctorate in environmental engineering, for what they called his “inappropriate and inaccurate” comments about the agency’s enforcement policy.
Ms. Jackson accepted his resignation on Monday morning. It had become clear in recent days that Republicans intended to continue to use Dr. Armendariz’s comments as ammunition in their continuing conflict with the Obama administration over environmental regulation.
“I respect the difficult decision he made and his wish to avoid distracting from the important work of the agency,” Ms. Jackson said. “We are all grateful for Dr. Armendariz’s service to E.P.A. and to our nation.”
Although administration officials said that Dr. Armendariz’s resignation was voluntary, he was left with little choice but to leave the agency to avoid further embarrassing President Obama, who is seeking re-election.
Senator James M. Inhofe, the Oklahoma Republican who has waged a vigorous campaign against what he calls the overzealous E.P.A. regulation under Mr. Obama, brought attention to the video posted on YouTube, of Dr. Armendariz speaking to local business and government leaders in 2010.
In the video, Dr. Armendariz discussed his approach to enforcing regulations on hydraulic fracturing in oil and gas extraction, acknowledging that his language might be “a little crude” but saying that it captured the deterrent effect he was seeking.
“It is kind of like how the Romans used to conquer villages in the Mediterranean — they’d go into a little Turkish town somewhere and they’d find the first five guys they saw and they’d crucify them,” Mr. Armendariz said on the tape. “Then that little town was really easy to manage for the next few years.”
He continued: “And so, you make examples out of people who are, in this case, not complying with the law. You find people who are not complying with the law and you hit them as hard as you can and you make examples out of them. There’s a deterrent effect there.”
Mr. Obama appointed Dr. Armendariz as regional administrator in late 2009. He had been a professor of environmental and civil engineering at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, a consultant to a national environmental group, a local activist and an industry chemical engineer.
Senator Inhofe said Dr. Armendariz’s resignation was not enough. “After his revelation that E.P.A.’s ‘general philosophy’ is to ‘crucify’ oil and gas companies, it was only right for Administrator Armendariz to resign today — but his resignation in no way solves the problem of President Obama and his E.P.A.’s crucifixion philosophy,” he said in a statement. He added that he would continue to investigate the agency’s enforcement actions.
Environmental advocates said that Dr. Armendariz’s departure was a loss for Texas. “The only people who will celebrate this resignation are the polluters who continue to foul Texas air and the politicians who serve those special interests,” said Ken Kramer, director of the Lone Star chapter of the Sierra Club.
Dr. Armendariz’s biography has been removed from the E.P.A. Region 6 home page. His deputy, Samuel J. Coleman, is now acting administrator for the region, which includes New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana and 66 tribal nations.
