CHICAGO — Responding to criticism from some Democratic supporters, President Obama said Monday that attacks on Mitt Romney’s experience at Bain Capital were fair game and that Mr. Romney’s years at the helm of a private equity firm were worthy of serious debate.
“This is not a distraction,” Mr. Obama said about Mr. Romney’s record at Bain during a news conference at the end of the NATO summit meeting here. “This is what this campaign is going to be about.”
Mr. Obama’s comments were his first explicit endorsement of his campaign’s aggressive strategy attacking Bain Capital. The Obama campaign’s full-throated assault, through ads, statements and Web videos, is now in its second week and portrays Mr. Romney in highly personal and unflattering ways. A video released on Monday highlights an office supply company in Indiana whose workers were fired when it was bought by a Bain company.
“You can tell by the way he acts, the way he talks,” one former employee says of Mr. Romney in the new ad. “He doesn’t care anything about the middle-class or the lower-class people.”
Mr. Obama denied that such attacks were unfair or unjustified, saying Mr. Romney’s “main calling card” for becoming president was his business experience. He said Mr. Romney’s years of buying and selling companies for profit gave him little understanding of the president’s role.
“If your main argument for how to grow the economy is, ‘I knew how to make a lot of money for investors,’ then you are missing what this job is about,” Mr. Obama said, putting an emphasis on the words “this job.” “It doesn’t mean you weren’t good at private equity. But that’s not what my job is as president. My job is to take into account everybody, not just some.”
The focus on the Bain attacks has added to the clash between the two campaigns and their allies about the increasingly negative tone of the 2012 presidential campaign, especially as Mr. Obama seeks to define Mr. Romney in the eyes of voters.
Targeting Bain carries risks for the president, not least with wealthy Wall Street executives whose largess in 2008 helped finance his campaign. Some of those supporters have already soured on the president after his efforts to tighten regulation of their industry.
Mr. Obama’s comments came a day after Cory A. Booker, the Democratic mayor of Newark, called the Obama campaign’s focus on Bain Capital a “nauseating” part of negative campaigning on both sides.
Mr. Booker later made an about-face on Twitter and in a video, saying Mr. Romney’s record at Bain was fair game.
On Monday, Republicans were quick to point out how uneasy some in Mr. Obama’s own party are about the criticism of private equity investors, and they started an “I Stand with Cory” petition to try to embarrass the president.
“President Obama confirmed today that he will continue his attacks on the free enterprise system, which Mayor Booker and other leading Democrats have spoken out against,” Mr. Romney said in a statement. “What this election is about is the 23 million Americans who are still struggling to find work and the millions who have lost their homes and have fallen into poverty.”
Bain Capital was also moved to defend itself, issuing a statement on Monday saying that “revenues grew in 80 percent of the more than 350 companies in which we have invested.”
Last week, Mr. Romney said the attacks on his record at Bain were intended to suggest that “I’m not a good person, or a good guy.” Mr. Obama’s campaign dismissed that criticism, saying its ads and statements were efforts to describe how the values Mr. Romney pursued at Bain would color his actions as president.
Mr. Obama said he views private equity firms like Bain Capital as a “healthy part of the free market” that are designed to “maximize profits.” He said that among them there are “folks who do good work.”
But he made it clear that he believes private equity firms put profits above all else, which, he said, is too limited a view at a time of economic struggle.
“Their priority is to maximize profits, and that’s not always going to be good for businesses or communities or workers,” Mr. Obama said.
Referring to his campaign’s videos that feature workers laid off by Bain companies, Mr. Obama said, “I’ve got to think about those workers in that video just as much as I’m thinking about folks who have been much more successful.”
Mr. Romney’s campaign has also described Mr. Obama in harsh and personal ways. Mr. Romney repeatedly says the president “doesn’t get it,” painting Mr. Obama as a slow-learning neophyte in the Oval Office. His campaign often accuses the president of personally breaking promises he made to the American people.
And the Republican “super PACs” have also targeted Mr. Obama personally. The New York Times reported last week on a plan by one of them to link Mr. Obama to his controversial former pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah A. Wright Jr. It was later dropped.
Both campaigns have made it clear that they intend to focus as much on the candidates themselves as the policies they support. Mr. Booker, speaking on NBC’s “Meet the Press” on Sunday, said the attacks were crowding out more serious conversations about the economy and other issues.
“My concern is we are about to go into a significant political campaign that will affect the destiny of our nation,” Mr. Booker said in his video clarification. “I am, indeed, upset. I am, indeed, frustrated. But I believe the American public, working together, we can begin to more and more denounce this type of campaigning.”
