When the Republican primary season began last year, some of the candidates seemed like such long shots that they could have been running simply to enhance their résumés. After all, the exposure through nationally televised debates could increase name recognition, pave the way to lucrative speaking fees and book advances or help with a re-election bid.
But as Mitt Romney has emerged as the party’s presumptive nominee, most of his erstwhile rivals have ended up in debt. And rather than leave the race with their political reputations burnished, some have left with their reputations diminished.
Newt Gingrich, the former speaker of the House who dropped out of the race on Wednesday, is a stark example of how the dream of being president — or at least a candidate with benefits — can be dashed.
He began the race as a self-described historian, with the clout to pull in millions in consulting fees. But as he dragged out his campaign after winning only two states, he was scorned by many in his own party. He had criticized Mr. Romney so pointedly (“Are you calling Mitt Romney a liar?” “Yes.”) that the Obama campaign has produced an entire Gingrich-based anti-Romney video that could make any eventual Gingrich endorsement of Mr. Romney look like a joke. As of last month, Mr. Gingrich had a campaign debt of $4.3 million. And his consulting company has filed for bankruptcy, a casualty of Mr. Gingrich’s absence while he ran for president.
“The reality is, the risks are very high,” said Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas who ran for the Republican presidential nomination in 2008. “I would think as many careers are sunk than launched.”
(Although Mr. Huckabee lost the nominating contest, he was signed by Fox News as a commentator after he dropped out. Since then he has published a best-selling book and now hosts a weekend television program and a nationally syndicated radio show.)
Of the six main candidates who began the 2012 Republican race in Iowa with Mr. Romney, only Representative Ron Paul of Texas is still running. His reputation with his die-hard supporters remains intact and he has no debt, but he has not won any states or expanded his following.
Only Rick Santorum, the former senator from Pennsylvania who dropped out last month, appears to have emerged with a brighter future than when he began.
Mr. Santorum is scheduled to sit down with Mr. Romney this week to discuss his role in the general election, with the understanding that he will probably endorse Mr. Romney, but not right away.
Having won almost a dozen states, and as the perceived favored candidate for conservatives the next time around, Mr. Santorum may carry some clout with Mr. Romney, but Mr. Santorum also has to focus on his own needs, like retiring his debt, which as of last month was $1.9 million.
These debts are not easy to pay off, especially for those who have lost.
“It’s not atypical for candidates to retain their debt for years or even decades,” said Sheila Krumholz, executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics, which keeps track of money in politics. “It can be an albatross around their necks for a long time.”
Perhaps the most famous case of lingering financial obligations was that of former Senator John Glenn of Ohio, who built a $3 million debt in 1984 when he ran for the Democratic presidential nomination. He carried that debt for 20 years before the Federal Election Commission finally gave him a reprieve.
But Mr. Glenn had an advantage that other losing candidates do not always enjoy: as an astronaut, he had a reputation as a hero. “The process chews people up,” said Merle Black, a political scientist at Emory University.
“But these are people who are not risk-averse,” he said. “There’s no tenure in politics, there’s no safety net and you have to make your case time and time again. But certain personalities are drawn to that, and they don’t let things set them back.”
Mr. Gingrich appears to be one of this group. Even as he quit the race on Wednesday, he spoke expansively of continuing to push his big ideas. “The election is just an interim step and then you have the next struggle,” he said.
He spoke tepidly of Mr. Romney — discussions of an actual endorsement are supposedly in the works. But none of the dropouts have evinced much enthusiasm for their likely standard-bearer, all but guaranteeing them little influence in the campaign and only going to show how presidential hopes often spring eternal.
Gov. Rick Perry of Texas, who began the race with considerable promise, quickly stumbled after some embarrassing gaffes. But he was one of the best fund-raisers of the cycle and his campaign debt is negligible. He has not said whether he intends to run for re-election as governor in 2014, but in a recent television interview he suggested that he might run again for president in 2016 (a further slap at Mr. Romney, who, if he won this year, would probably run for re-election that year).
Similarly, Herman Cain, a businessman who briefly led the Republican pack before falling back amid reports of an extramarital affair, is still drawing crowds.
“People often ask, why am I still out here speaking even though I’m no longer in the Republican primary contest?” Mr. Cain, who was $450,000 in debt last month, told a television interviewer a few days ago in St. Paul. “The answer is, people are still listening.”
Representative Michele Bachmann of Minnesota, who ended her presidential campaign after a sixth-place finish in Iowa, is seeking re-election to her House seat. Her presidential campaign is $1 million in debt, but she has already raised $550,000 for the House race.
Jon M. Huntsman Jr., the former Utah governor and ambassador to China, endorsed Mr. Romney when he dropped out in January, but he has kept a low profile. He is the most heavily in debt, owing $5.4 million, but he is also quite wealthy.
R. C. Hammond, Mr. Gingrich’s press secretary, said that a fear of accumulating debt should not deter anyone from running for president, nor should fear of blunders in a campaign.
“No matter what happened in the race,” he said of Mr. Gingrich, “he will always be the speaker who took back the majority; he will always be the author of the Contract with America.”
“John McCain is still a hero despite losing,” Mr. Hammond added. “You can’t look at people who enter the arena at this level and say that because they didn’t succeed at this, they have failed.”
