WASHINGTON — It is a maxim in Congress these days: If high-profile legislation affecting millions of Americans is about to expire, deal with it at the last possible second, preferably with rancor.
But a major exception is in the offing with the Bush-era tax cuts, which are set to lapse on Jan 1. Both parties in the House and the Senate are eager, perhaps even giddy, at the prospect of voting for their respective versions of an extension of the cuts this summer, well before the due date.
Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, has said there will be a House vote to extend the entire package before the November election. “We shouldn’t wait until New Year’s Eve,” he said in a speech at a recent fiscal conference, “to give American job creators the confidence that they aren’t going to get hit with a tax hike on New Year’s Day.” Democrats are trying to up the ante. On Wednesday, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, called on the speaker to schedule a vote right away.
“Democrats believe that tax cuts for those earning over a million dollars a year should expire and that we should use the resulting revenues to pay down the deficit,” she said. Senate Democrats are trying to cobble together a measure that would extend the tax cuts for the middle class but drop them for higher earners. Democrats hope the bill will reach the Senate floor this summer.
Without any extensions, the expiration would raise taxes next year by $221 billion.
Both parties are making an election-year calculation that they hope will lift their ticket from the top on down.
Republicans believe that they will have the upper hand in any tax cut debate, and they are eager to portray themselves as a friend to taxpayers and small businesses. “I believe what their goal is,” said Senator Dean Heller of Nevada, speaking of Democrats, “is to tax every small business.”
For their part, Democrats wish to continue the narrative they have been weaving that Republicans are for the wealthy and that they are for the middle class.
“I think we’ve worked hard over the years to decouple tax cuts for the middle class from those with incomes over a million dollars,” said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, who has been pushing the $1 million cap for the better part of two years. “I think we now have the high ground on taxes. The polling data has it, you feel it when you go in the streets, it is plain as the nose on your face.”
But each side’s messages have complications. Republicans are sensitive to the notion that there is public support for a tax increase on high earners, and to their being portrayed as the party of Daddy Warbucks.
“I haven’t taken anything off the table,” Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, said when asked if she could support a cap on tax cuts at $1 million. “I haven’t ruled anything out.”
Senator Susan Collins of Maine also said she would accept such a cap if an exception were made for certain small businesses.
Democrats cannot even seem to agree on their own message on taxes. President Obama, for instance, has insisted that the cap should be on income over $250,000, which would produce far more revenue for the federal government. And Senate Democrats have no agreement on whether the target should be $1 million or $250,000, though there appears to be more support for the former.
Further, some Democrats are as skittish about raising taxes as some Republicans are about seeming to favor the rich.
“I’m not committed,” said Senator Ben Nelson of Nebraska, who is retiring. “I want to see tax cuts and spending cuts go together. Until I see the actual proposal, it’s hard to know.” Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, asked his opinion about a cap, refused to answer.
Republicans believe that the House will pass a tax cut extension for all and that the Senate will be left in the land of filibuster nothingness that has come to define the chamber. The ultimate battle is likely to seep into the lame duck session after the election and become tied to looming cuts of more than $1 billion resulting from the failure of a bicameral committee to find cost savings last year, as well as the expiration of a variety of other tax provisions.
Staff members in the leadership offices from both parties and chambers pointed to the politics, rather than the policy outcome, of the tax cut fight. Ms. Collins said she was skeptical that there was a serious desire among Democrats, especially Mr. Obama, to come to a compromise on the Bush tax cuts. The evidence: her phone is not exactly ringing off the hook with support for her bill, which would exempt from a tax increase some small-business owners who pay taxes through the individual tax code.
“It is an obvious bridge between the two parties,” she said. “On my side of the aisle we’re very concerned about the impact on small businesses. On the other side of the aisle, they really want more revenue. And the fact that the administration has shown no interest in it does not speak well of their intentions.”
