GREENSBORO, N.C. — Defense lawyers for former Senator John Edwards spent much of the morning trying to show that money from the heiress Rachel Mellon used to cover up Mr. Edwards’s affair was not intended to influence the election but was just a gift from a friend.
“She liked him as a person,” Alexander Forger, who handles Ms. Mellon’s finances, said under questioning. “It wasn’t because he was running for elective office.”
“If he had wanted to be elected president of Duke University,” Mr. Forger said, “she would have supported that.”
Defense lawyers have argued that it was a former Edwards aide, Andrew Young, who had secretly gone to Ms. Mellon behind Mr. Edwards’s back, scamming both her and Mr. Edwards, a former Democratic presidential contender.
But by the end of the day Monday, in the third week of the federal trial, prosecutors came back with two witnesses who said Mr. Edwards had routinely gone to Ms. Mellon himself, asking for money for needs beyond his political campaigns.
In all, Ms. Mellon gave about $7 million to Mr. Edwards since his first run for president in 2004. Only $725,000 of that, which she shipped to him secretly and which was used to hide his affair, is under investigation as a violation of campaign finance law.
On Monday afternoon, Tim Toben, a longtime supporter, described how he had gone from the inner circle of Mr. Edwards’s campaign to a supporter of President Obama.
Mr. Toben, who made his fortune when he started and sold a successful database marketing start-up and then became a builder of environmentally friendly housing in Chapel Hill, N.C., said he donated thousands of dollars to Mr. Edwards and even sat next to Mr. Edwards’s mistress, Rielle Hunter, at a Dave Matthews concert and attended a housewarming party at the new Edwards home. He also sold land next to his own home to Mr. Young, and they became friends.
By 2007, when the Youngs and a pregnant Ms. Hunter went underground, Mr. Toben helped get them to an airport in Raleigh, N.C., to escape reporters and later retrieved a pink cellphone and a photograph signed “I love you, John” from a Chapel Hill house Ms. Hunter had been hiding in.
Mr. Toben, 53, said he turned his allegiance from Mr. Edwards to Mr. Obama once he learned that Ms. Hunter was pregnant.
“Maybe the American people would forgive a mistress, but not a mistress with a baby,” he told the court.
Still, he continued to meet with Mr. Edwards, who despite the scandal was convinced that he could still get appointed attorney general in an Obama administration.
At a dinner in Chapel Hill in the summer of 2008, Mr. Edwards told Mr. Toben he planned to ask Ms. Mellon for $50 million to start a foundation so he could be to poverty what Al Gore was to the Internet, Mr. Toben told the court.
A year later, the affair exposed and Mr. Young preparing a tell-all book, Mr. Edwards warned that Mr. Toben had to choose between him and his friendship with Mr. Young.
Mr. Young had crossed the line and “was not someone to be trusted,” Mr. Edwards told him, explaining that Mr. Young had gone behind his back to ask Ms. Mellon for $50 million.
But Mr. Toben remembered Mr. Edwards talking about getting that much money from Ms. Mellon earlier.
“It was clear to me he was trying to disparage Mr. Young,” Mr. Toben said.
Earlier in the day, Tony Willis, who handles Ms. Mellon’s extensive horticulture library and archives her personal correspondence, testified that as late as 2011 Mr. Edwards had privately asked Ms. Mellon for $3 million to help him get re-established.
The scandal long exposed and his career in tatters, she was not about to give more money and asked Mr. Willis to write a letter cutting him off, he told the court.
Prosecutors hoped the letter would show that Ms. Mellon was not as interested in supporting her friend once his political career was over, but the letter was kept from the jury on procedural grounds.
On Tuesday, the government, in its attempt to prove that Mr. Edwards was at the center of a conspiracy to violate campaign laws, will call Wendy Button, a former speechwriter for Mr. Edwards. They are hoping that communications between her and her former boss will show that Mr. Edwards knew what Ms. Mellon and the late Fred Baron, another wealthy backer, were giving money for: a political campaign, not just the cover-up of a personal embarrassment.
