HILLSBOROUGH, N.H. — In the days and weeks after the 2008 election, it seemed as if President Obama had permanently yanked independent-minded New Hampshire out of the reach of Republicans.
But much has changed since he triumphantly won here four years ago. Republicans surged back to power in the State Capitol in 2010, and Mitt Romney’s campaign now views the Granite State as a real opportunity to pry four electoral votes away from Mr. Obama in November.
In an appearance Friday at an abandoned 19th-century bridge that was repaired with $150,000 of federal stimulus money, Mr. Romney sought to tap into the one thing that gets mild-mannered New Hampshire voters riled up: wasteful spending.
“This is the absolute Bridge to Nowhere if ever was one,” Mr. Romney said, to knowing laughs. “That’s your stimulus dollars at work.”
Mr. Romney is hoping his message of lower taxes, less regulation and an emphatic denunciation of Mr. Obama’s economic record is in sync with voters whose local economy is better than the nation’s but still struggling. Aides have privately identified it as potentially crucial to victory in a close election, and a potent symbolic win.
He is also betting that his personal connection to the state will help him. Aides said on Friday that he planned to spend the night at his family’s vacation home in Wolfboro, N.H., before heading to his home in Boston.
But the Republican candidate is playing catch-up in New Hampshire, where polls show the president with a lead. Mr. Obama has spent months building a campaign operation in the state even as Mr. Romney was forced to shift his New Hampshire resources to other states during the primary. Mr. Romney’s state director started just this month.
“The Obama campaign’s had well over a dozen people up here since before the primary, and they never slowed down,” said Steve Duprey, a Republican who worked for John McCain in 2008.
“We Republicans are still putting the pieces together after the primary campaign, and not even running on all cylinders yet,” said Michael P. Dennehy, a veteran Republican operative. “I think it’s going to be a very close race — two, three, four points, maximum.”
That would fit, historically. In 1992, Bill Clinton won the state by about a percentage point. In 2000, George W. Bush won by about the same amount. Four years later, John Kerry snatched it back, winning by about two percentage points. Polls suggest it will be a close race again this year.
President Obama and his top surrogates — Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.; Michelle Obama, the first lady; and members of the cabinet — have repeatedly traveled to New Hampshire in recent weeks.
At a campaign event in mid-April in Exeter, N.H., Mr. Biden hammered the president’s theme of tax fairness — an argument that Mr. Obama’s top advisers believe will help the president keep the state in line with the rest of the Democratic Northeast.
“When you all pay your taxes next week, you and every citizen in New Hampshire and my home state of Delaware ought to be able to know that everyone else is paying their fair share as well,” Mr. Biden said. “But the truth is you know they’re not.”
Terie Norelli, the House Democratic leader in the state and a member of Mr. Obama’s steering committee, said Mr. Romney and the New Hampshire Republicans were not “in touch with the people” of the state. “People think that President Obama is on the right track,” she said.
But Tom Rath, a longtime Republican operative in the state who is working for Mr. Romney, said that the combination of forces that propelled Mr. Obama to victory in New Hampshire in 2008 were simply not present this year: exuberant young voters hanging on Mr. Obama’s every word and a general distaste for the former president, Mr. Bush.
“This election will not be a referendum on George W. Bush anymore,” Mr. Rath said. “It will be a referendum on Barack Obama.”
In interviews, voters at Mr. Romney’s event on Friday said they were drawn to his message of austerity after years of excessive government spending. Even independent voters here who backed Mr. Obama in 2008 say they are keeping an open mind about Mr. Romney.
“We’re willing to listen,” said Arnold Husemann, 70, who said he and his wife, Vicki, 68, were “staunch Obama” supporters last time around.
But Mike Stellato, 70, who also listened to Mr. Romney on Friday, said he worried about government spending and said: “We are going to end up like Greece in a little while. That’s terrible.”
Mr. Stellato pointed to the unfinished bridge, calling it a “dumb thing to do.”
Outside Mr. Romney’s event, supporters of the bridge noted that it had been built in the 1860s and there had been bipartisan agreement, even among local Republicans now supporting Mr. Romney, to preserve the landmark along with a park as part of the area’s history.
“We built them without mortar of stone split from boulders strewn on our fields by ice age glaciers,” the supporters wrote in a “Note to Mr. Romney” that they handed out at the event. After qualifying for stimulus financing, they wrote, “it went ahead to completion.”
The future of the bridge may no longer be in doubt. But the winner of the state’s electoral votes very much is.
