PORTSMOUTH, N.H. — Mitt Romney said on Monday that “even Jimmy Carter” would have issued the order to kill Osama bin Laden in Pakistan a year ago, dismissing President Obama’s suggestion that Mr. Romney, the presumptive Republican nominee, would not have followed the same path as the president.
The swipe at the White House, delivered casually on the rope line of a campaign event here, touched off a pointed exchange with Mr. Obama, who quickly accused Mr. Romney of flip-flopping on an issue that the president has put at the center of his re-election campaign.
Attempting to minimize Mr. Obama’s signature military accomplishment and burnish his own standing as a potential commander in chief, Mr. Romney implied that any president would have acted on the same intelligence as Mr. Obama, who oversaw the daring early-morning raid exactly one year ago Tuesday.
Asked by reporters if he, too, would have given the order to raid Bin Laden’s compound, Mr. Romney replied, “Of course, of course,” before taking the jab at Mr. Carter, the former Democratic president known for his longtime work promoting peace.
“Even Jimmy Carter would have given that order,” Mr. Romney said.
Mr. Obama, without mentioning his Republican rival by name, suggested that remark ran counter to Mr. Romney’s past statements about how far America should go to pursue Bin Laden. Referring to the hunt for the terrorist mastermind in 2007, Mr. Romney said, “It’s not worth moving heaven and earth and spending billions of dollars just trying to catch one person.” A few days later, though, Mr. Romney said of Bin Laden, “he’s going to pay and he will die.”
After the raid, Mr. Romney praised the troops in the operation and Mr. Obama for his actions.
Still, Mr. Obama’s re-election campaign has seized on the original comment, asserting that Mr. Romney, had he been president, might not have carried out the attack.
“I assume that people meant what they said when they said it,” Mr. Obama said during a news conference on Monday with the Japanese prime minister, Yoshihiko Noda, at the White House.
“I said I’d go after Bin Laden if we had a clear shot at him, and I did,” Mr. Obama said. “If there are others who have said one thing and now suggest they’d do something else, then I’d let them go ahead and explain it.”
Over the past week, as the anniversary of Bin Laden’s killing has neared, the president’s re-election campaign has turned the much-celebrated attack into an unexpected flash point in the presidential race. Republicans have accused the White House of politicizing the killing in an unseemly way. Mr. Obama’s allies, eager to deny Republicans their traditional advantage with voters on national security issues, have portrayed it as a legitimate part of Mr. Obama’s record and sought to keep Mr. Romney on the defensive over his own remarks on the subject.
The Obama campaign has produced a stark commercial about the raid that ominously asks “Which path would Mitt Romney have taken?” Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. last week wondered aloud if Bin Laden would be still be alive today had Mr. Romney been president. And on Sunday, during an appearance on “Meet the Press,” a campaign adviser to Mr. Obama, Robert Gibbs, said, “I don’t think it’s clear that he would” have given the order to kill Bin Laden.
By referring to Mr. Carter, the Romney campaign is trying to tie President Obama to a Democratic president considered by many to be weak on national security issues. But the comparison is somewhat strained: the military raid for which Mr. Carter is best known — the attempted 1980 rescue of hostages from the American Embassy in Tehran — was a failure, while the raid against Bin Laden was a success.
This is not the first time that the Romney campaign has invoked Mr. Carter’s name. One of Mr. Romney’s advisers, Richard Williamson, wrote last week for Foreign Policy magazine that events including North Korea’s recent test of a long-range missile “may be bringing us to a juncture at which the inexperience and incompetence of a presidency crystallizes in the public mind.”
“In short, we are approaching a Jimmy Carter moment,” wrote Mr. Williamson, a senior diplomat under several Republican presidents. “In a perilous world, this is not the kind of leadership our country needs.”
The comparison to Mr. Carter appears to be a response to the White House claim that Mr. Romney would pursue an obsolete, throwback approach to international affairs. And on Tuesday, in an effort to claim an advantage on national security, Mr. Romney will observe Bin Laden’s death by visiting a fire station in Lower Manhattan with former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, an outspoken critic of Mr. Obama’s policies in the Mideast.
The question of how — and whether — to use the death of Bin Laden in the context of a presidential campaign is fraught with emotional and politically delicate baggage.
Aides to Mr. Romney said the Obama campaign’s highlighting of the raid had turned a nonpartisan victory in the war on terror into a crass political ad.
But Mr. Obama rejected on Monday the suggestion that his administration or his campaign had been treating the subject with anything but the seriousness that it deserved.
“I hardly think that you’ve seen any excessive celebration taking place here,” Mr. Obama said. “The American people rightly remember what we as a country accomplished in bringing to justice somebody who killed over 3,000 of our citizens.”
He added, “For us to use that time for some reflection, to give thanks to those who participated, is entirely appropriate and that’s what’s been taking place.”
