WASHINGTON — Howard Marlowe was speaking a few weeks ago to a government relations class at the University of California, Berkeley, about his work as a federal lobbyist when several students voiced their deep mistrust of his profession and their misgivings about ever considering it themselves.
As president of a Washington lobbying association, Mr. Marlowe had no real answer. Once a Washington insider becomes identified by the scarlet letter of lobbyist, he acknowledged afterward, “you’re a leper” if you ever want to run for office or work for the government.
“We’re tainted,” he said.
Remaking the image of an industry as battered as that of Washington lobbying might seem like a fool’s quest for even the most battle-tested public relations person. And it may be difficult to dredge up much sympathy for an industry that earned $3.3 billion last year for helping oil companies, drug makers, Wall Street firms and others get access to Washington’s elite.
But in a series of steps including pro bono work, ethics training and tightened disclosure requirements, some of Washington’s leading lobbyists are mounting a concerted push to earn, if not respectability, then at least something less than public disdain.
A growing number say they can no longer afford to see their reputations slip even further. Lobbying groups are proposing more ethics restrictions on themselves. They are meeting with “good government” groups that they once shunned. And they are promoting civic-minded work they are doing free — in contrast to the typical image of corporate giants paying millions for the lobbyists’ influence.
The lobbying shop of Holland & Knight, for instance, announced this month that it is doing pro bono work for a decidedly more sympathetic client: a group of slave descendants who are lobbying for the return of more than 2,600 acres of land in Harris Neck, Ga., that they say the government seized improperly from their families during World War II.
James T. Walsh, a former Republican congressman who is a lobbyist for K&L Gates, said of his industry, “We’re trying to make the profession more professional and make the process more transparent, and at the same time keep our First Amendment rights to lobby intact.”
Industry critics are skeptical. While some view the efforts as sincere, others see them as more rhetoric than reality, driven by fears that Congress and the executive branch might come down even harder on lobbyists if the industry does not do more to police itself.
“The lobbying profession has been behind the wheeling and dealing, the wining and dining, that people see as what’s wrong with Washington,” said Craig Holman, an expert on lobbying who is himself a registered lobbyist with Public Citizen, a nonprofit government watchdog group in Washington.
“So now what we’re seeing is a campaign by lobbyists to avoid being the scapegoat,” he said. “It’s a pre-emptive strike to avoid stronger, more significant proposals.”
President Obama, who has frequently attacked lobbyists and the culture of influence peddling he says they promote, has already imposed a number of ethics measures restricting the role that lobbyists can play within his administration.
The industry suffered through a round of bad publicity last fall after it was disclosed that the Republican presidential candidate Newt Gingrich was paid more than $1.6 million by the mortgage lender Fannie Mae as a consultant or “historian” — but not, he insisted, as a lobbyist.
That situation highlighted one of the biggest image problems lobbyists say they face in combating public distrust: the perception that a number of “unregistered lobbyists” like Mr. Gingrich or Tom Daschle, the former Senate majority leader, have earned huge fees from corporate clients without calling themselves lobbyists.
Mr. Marlowe, the president of the American League of Lobbyists, estimates that there are about 3,000 “nonregistered lobbyists who ought to be registered” in Washington, in addition to more than 12,000 who are actually registered. His group recently put out a series of proposals that, among other things, would broaden the definition of a lobbyist and close complicated loopholes allowing some “consultants” to avoid registering.
Under the league’s proposals, outside consultants would have to register with the government once they make a single lobbying contact with the government for a particular client; that standard would replace a cumbersome formula that now takes into account whether 20 percent of a consultant’s time for a client is devoted to lobbying.
The proposal would also eliminate several exemptions that currently allow federal employees and state and local consultants to avoid registering as lobbyists, it would require lobbyists to undergo ethics training, and it would make the Justice Department responsible for enforcing compliance.
Architects of the plan say that by closing loopholes, it would probably require people like Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Daschle to register as lobbyists.
But the association’s proposals do not address what most people agree is the single most corrosive element in the lobbying process: the perception that huge campaign contributions from lobbyists and their clients work to influence legislators’ policy positions and legislation.
In his State of the Union address this year, Mr. Obama called for restricting bundlers of campaign donations from lobbying Congress. The American Bar Association, after a review that included a number of prominent lobbyists and lawyers, has also called for such restrictions.
But the American League of Lobbyists decided not to touch the issue — partly because it could doom the rest of its proposals politically, league members said.
The campaign finance issue is the 800-pound gorilla in the debate over how to change lobbying laws, industry officials say.
So far, only one member of Congress, Representative Mike Quigley, Democrat of Illinois, has proposed any legislation to tighten the requirements on who must register as a lobbyist, and his proposed bill does not include restrictions on campaign contributions.
His proposal has received little support: it has only one co-sponsor, and no hearings are scheduled. His staff members have been meeting with leading lobbyists as well as government watchdog groups.
“The hope is that we’ll find some common ground,” Mr. Quigley said.
Even Jack Abramoff, the disgraced Washington lobbyist whose 2006 conviction on corruption charges exposed a range of industry abuses, has been out on the stump calling for redemption and reform in the lobbying industry in a series of public appearances tied to his recently released memoir.
But many lobbying leaders say they do not want Mr. Abramoff to be the face of the industry’s overhaul efforts.
Nicholas Allard, a lobbyist at Patton Boggs in Washington who worked on the bar association’s review of lobbying rules, said the Abramoff scandal showed the need for bringing greater internal accountability and ethics to lobbying.
“No matter what rules are adopted and enforced, the integrity of the system fundamentally depends on the honesty of government officials and the professional advocates and lobbyists,” he said. “Snakes and worms are going to slither and wiggle, whether it’s in an open field or a thicket of regulations.”
