They court him over coffee and drop by when they are in town. They dangle invitations for golf and enlist friends to put in a good word.
In an election year when partisanship has burned white hot and the economy has sputtered, two presidential candidates who agree on very little, Mitt Romney and Barack Obama, have reached a rare consensus: they are both determined to score the endorsement of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, whose name is all but synonymous with Wall Street clout and nonpartisan politics.
Now, their pursuit of the billionaire mayor is headed into overdrive, with both campaigns making the kind of conspicuous ring-kissing gestures that are reserved for their most sought-after political allies, even though the candidates publicly disagree with the mayor on a range of issues.
On Tuesday, Mr. Romney showed up at the mayor’s philanthropic foundation on the Upper East Side of Manhattan for a secret breakfast meeting. Over coffee and juice, Mr. Romney made clear that he was there to pick the mayor’s brain. “Tell me what’s on your mind,” he said, according to aides who were briefed on the 30-minute discussion, which touched on immigration, gun control and education policy.
In its own public display of affection, the White House invited Mr. Bloomberg for a round of golf with two members of the Obama administration. He played with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and his son Hunter at a private club in suburban Maryland on Friday and with Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta at a military base in Northern Virginia on Saturday, according to people informed of the outings.
The aggressive wooing of Mr. Bloomberg, an independent who did not take sides in the last presidential race, highlights the outsize role that Wall Street is likely to play in this year’s election, as both a symbol and a purveyor of campaign contributions.
For all of his achievements, Mr. Bloomberg is, first and foremost, a business mogul, whose deep knowledge of and close relationships within the world of high finance could carry significant weight at a time when many in industry feel under siege.
“If you want to have friends in the financial sector and you want to shape public opinion in the business capital of the world, then the guy you turn to, the imprimatur you want, is that of Michael R. Bloomberg,” said Hank Sheinkopf, a longtime New York political operative who is close to the mayor.
During their meeting, Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Romney discussed Wall Street’s frustrations with President Obama, who has chided bankers for their practices and called for tighter regulation of their industry, according to a person with knowledge of the conversation, who like many interviewed for this article, spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of upsetting the high-powered leaders.
Mr. Bloomberg, who has lent his reputation for common-sense government and his prowess for fund-raising to dozens of candidates from both parties over the past decade, feared that an endorsement in the 2008 race might have negative repercussions for the city he oversees.
But as his mayoral term winds down, he has told advisers that he is willing to back a candidate this time around, touching off an intense competition for his support in the general election.
“I’ll see down the road,” the mayor said coyly on Tuesday when asked about an endorsement. Describing his impressions of Mr. Romney and Mr. Obama, he made clear that he sees a wide gap between them. “They’re very different, and they give the public a real choice,” he said. “It’s hard to argue that you can’t tell the difference, if you will. They run the spectrum on lots of different issues.”
Mr. Bloomberg appears to relish the attention from the campaigns, which had crammed his calendar with boldface names. There was a lunch with Mr. Obama at the White House in February, not to mention a golf game with the commander in chief not long ago.
Neither candidate, however, is relying on his own charms to win over Mr. Bloomberg. In late April, a high-profile supporter of Mr. Romney, Senator John McCain of Arizona, talked up the presumptive Republican nominee to the mayor during a visit to City Hall, according to aides.
At the same time, aides to the president periodically reach out to the mayor’s office to take Mr. Bloomberg’s political temperature. Mr. Biden stopped by for coffee at Gracie Mansion, the mayor’s official residence, in 2010.
To commit to either candidate, Mr. Bloomberg will have to make peace with, or at least overlook, a raft of major policy disagreements, several of them on issues for which the mayor has deep-seated and passionately held views.
Mr. Romney, for instance, vigorously opposes legalized abortion and has called for the elimination of federal financing for Planned Parenthood. Mr. Bloomberg is an avid defender of those rights, and this year alone he donated $250,000 to Planned Parenthood when the organization came under fire from conservatives.
Mr. Obama pushed for the extension of the middle-class tax cuts created under President George W. Bush, which Mr. Bloomberg has called fiscally irresponsible. And Mr. Obama has used language to describe Wall Street that has offended the mayor, who has scolded the president’s political party for “pitting Americans against each other in a game of class warfare for their own political purposes.”
Mr. Bloomberg, never known for suppressing his opinions, is hardly shying from these disputes with the candidates. During his meeting with Mr. Romney, he acknowledged their policy differences, especially over the issue of gun control, according to people told of the discussion. Mr. Bloomberg has financed a coalition to push for stricter requirements on background checks for gun buyers and  the concealment of firearms. Mr. Romney has railed against the creation of rules that he said “burden lawful gun owners.”
Mr. Romney was careful neither to ask for Mr. Bloomberg’s support, nor to discuss the possibility of choosing Mr. Bloomberg as his running mate, a prospect regarded as highly unlikely. “It was a first date,” said an adviser to one of the men.
And as with any debut, Mr. Romney was intent on leaving the best possible impression. When pressed about the meeting on Tuesday, he was effusive in his praise for New York City’s revitalization and Mr. Bloomberg’s role in it. “It’s quite an extraordinary story,” Mr. Romney said.
