WASHINGTON — President Obama walks into the Roosevelt Room of the White House and takes his seat around a table. The West Wing, as on most Sunday evenings, is quiet except for the tight circle of advisers who gather for a confidential briefing on his re-election.
The gathering often takes place after Mr. Obama’s regular Sunday round of golf, and while the atmosphere is casual, the agenda is anything but: keeping the president immersed in what it will take to win a second term. He receives an update on how his operation is expanding in battleground states, he watches previews of television ads and he studies a presentation on his various paths to victory.
These previously undisclosed sessions, which take place nearly every other week just across the hall from the Oval Office, are designed to bridge a divide between his campaign headquarters in Chicago and his aides in Washington in preparing for what Mr. Obama and his team anticipate will be a grueling race against Mitt Romney.
The cast of top advisers — a group limited to 10 in hopes of streamlining the meetings — offers a revealing look at the pecking order of the hierarchy in the Obama campaign.
Neither Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. nor any other cabinet members are on hand. Instead, the room is filled with a group of trusted confidants who were at Mr. Obama’s side during the last campaign.
The attendance roster, which was confirmed by multiple people familiar with the list, reveals a mix of White House staff, including David Plouffe, a senior adviser and campaign manager from 2008; Jacob J. Lew, the chief of staff; Valerie Jarrett and Pete Rouse, senior advisers; Dan Pfeiffer, the communications director; and Alyssa Mastromonaco, a deputy chief of staff who has worked for Mr. Obama since his days in the Senate.
The campaign team includes Jim Messina, the campaign manager, who sets the agenda for the meeting; David Axelrod, a senior strategist; Stephanie Cutter, a deputy campaign manager; and Larry Grisolano, a top political adviser.
The president, who is set to open his re-election campaign formally on Saturday with back-to-back rallies in Ohio and Virginia, has been preparing to run against Mr. Romney since well before the Republican nomination was settled. Mr. Obama has been studying the statements and record of his opponent — particularly on the Massachusetts health care law, a model for the national law — and is well on his way to becoming a student of Mr. Romney’s positions.
Mr. Obama, who three years ago became the first president to demand a BlackBerry to keep in touch with the outside world, has now become the first sitting president to rely on an iPad to stay informed. He watches campaign commercials, offering his seal of approval to the first wave of advertisements to be used against Mr. Romney, and he follows his rival through newspaper articles and blogs.
The president has already made clear that he is well acquainted with Mr. Romney’s views. At a news conference this week, Mr. Obama urged people to “take a look” at his opponent. He reprised a comment by Mr. Romney in 2007 when he said he would not invade a country to capture or kill Osama bin Laden.
“I said that I’d go after Bin Laden if we had a clear shot at him,” Mr. Obama said, “and I did.”
If running for president the first time is a full-time job, running for re-election is a bit like moonlighting. For all the planning that Mr. Obama’s team employs, uncertainties like the jobs report on Friday mornings often end up driving the election.
Even so, some presidents are more political than others. Mr. Obama is intensely competitive, but far from obsessive about politics in the way that former President Bill Clinton is. Mr. Obama’s approach is closer to that of former President George W. Bush, who assumed a bird’s-eye view of his re-election bid.
In a contest increasingly guided by factors beyond the direct control of either candidate, Mr. Obama has gradually increased the attention he has devoted to the race. Yet aides say he still spends far more time on his iPad checking scores on ESPN than obsessively reading up on Mr. Romney, or digging into the weeds of his own polls or campaign metrics.
The Sunday meeting, which participants have sworn to keep secret, was devised by his advisers to help Mr. Obama begin focusing on his re-election bid. The time is intentionally carved out to discuss big-picture themes that the president will use to challenge Mr. Romney.
“They have a candidate now, and the president is certainly paying more attention to that candidate, his arguments and his record and approach,” said Mr. Axelrod, a senior adviser, whose cellphone rings with increasing frequency, with the president on the line hoping to talk about the campaign. “He’s homing in on the race, but unlike the other guy, he has a day job, and that is still where the bulk of his attention has to be.”
Mr. Obama has told associates that he is aware of the precariousness of the political environment for him. He asks aides about his campaign message. He craves the bullet-point summaries of polls, but he does not delve into the fine print of surveys or other campaign research.
They say he is intensely motivated to win not only because of his personal legacy and the historic nature of his presidency. He also sees a second term as essential, they said, to ensuring that key policies like his national health care law, which could be overthrown by the Supreme Court, are not wiped from the books.
“Every election is the most important election in our history,” Mr. Obama said the other night at a fund-raising event, offering a window into his campaign message. “But let me tell you, this one matters. This one matters. This one matters.”
The president will make his case against Mr. Romney on Saturday more forcefully than he has, aides said, hoping to define his opponent before the fall campaign.
He has met Mr. Romney only once — they shared the stage at a 2004 Gridiron dinner in Washington — and he has told friends that he respects Mr. Romney’s intellect, but bristles at his view of government and economic fairness.
When their paths crossed eight years ago, Mr. Obama playfully mocked Mr. Romney and encouraged him to “go for it.” He reflected on the losing presidential campaign of Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and jabbed Mr. Romney, “I hear that Massachusetts is a great launching pad.”
The rallies for the president on Saturday in Columbus, Ohio, and Richmond, Va., are expected to help capture the enthusiasm of students before the summer begins.
Campaign aides will register volunteers with iPads, and keep their information for the fall campaign. Aides said more than 48,000 people signed up by text message to win “Backstage with Barack” passes.
Six months before Election Day, Mr. Obama waxes nostalgic at the events of his presidency. He seldom talks about the Nobel Peace Prize he was awarded. The oil spill along the Gulf Coast — once described as his Hurricane Katrina — is rarely mentioned. But he warns Democrats that the trials of his first term are about to be unspooled in a bare-knuckle campaign.
“There’s nothing more humbling, actually, than being president,” Mr. Obama said the other day at a fund-raiser, where his words almost lapsed into past tense as he stood beside Mr. Clinton and talked about Air Force One. “It’s a great plane, and I’ll miss it, too!”
“But not yet!” a supporter shouted from the audience, trying to buck him up.
As applause rose from the crowd, Mr. Obama paused and declared, “But not yet!”
