WASHINGTON — The Justice Department has found that two prosecutors involved in the botched 2008 corruption trial of Senator Ted Stevens engaged in “reckless professional misconduct,” but it stopped short of firing the men, saying their mistakes were not intentional.
In a cover letter to a 672-page report provided to Congress on Thursday, alongside additional attachments and findings, the Justice Department said the two prosecutors would be suspended without pay — Joseph Bottini for 40 days, and James Goeke for 15 days.
Mr. Stevens, Republican of Alaska, was charged during the Bush administration with failing to report that an oil services firm had remodeled his house. He was convicted just before the 2008 election and lost his seat — briefly giving Democrats a filibuster-proof majority in the Senate, which enabled them to pass the health care law.
The case, however, started to fall apart after it emerged that prosecutors had failed to turn over information, like conflicting statements by witnesses, that might have helped Mr. Stevens at his trial. Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., then new to the job, asked the judge to throw out the conviction, and both the court and the department began investigations. Mr. Stevens died in a 2010 plane crash.
Many of the department’s findings appeared to dovetail with a report by the court-appointed special prosecutor, which was made public in March. Both reports portrayed a rushed and poorly supervised preparation for the trial, criticizing Mr. Bottini and Mr. Goeke while withholding judgment about a third prosecutor, Nicholas Marsh, because he committed suicide.
And both reports essentially exonerated two supervisors at the public integrity section, William Welch and Brenda Morris, and a lower-ranking prosecutor, Edward Sullivan. (The Justice Department report said that Ms. Morris, assigned to take over the case just before trial, had shown “poor judgment” in failing to oversee how colleagues reviewed what evidence to turn over, but did not commit misconduct.)
There was at least one major difference, however: the special prosecutor concluded that Mr. Bottini and Mr. Goeke had intentionally withheld evidence, while the Justice Department investigation found that their mistakes — while showing reckless disregard for their disclosure obligations — were not deliberate.
“This confirms what we have said all along: Joe’s failings here were human mistakes, and the special prosecutor’s accusation that he had intentionally violated the rules was completely baseless,” said Kenneth Wainstein, Mr. Bottini’s lawyer.
Senator Lisa Murkowski, an Alaska Republican who has called for Mr. Bottini and Mr. Goeke to be fired, said that the department’s announcement “falls short on many counts” and that she remained “unconvinced” that the problems were isolated and unintentional.
Even the prospect of suspending Mr. Bottini and Mr. Goeke was disputed inside the department, the materials showed. Terrence Berg, a lawyer with the department’s Professional Misconduct Review Unit who was assigned to review the report and propose any discipline, wanted to reject its findings. In a lengthy memorandum, he argued that the mistakes amounted to “poor judgment” but not misconduct, so no sanction was warranted.
But Mr. Berg — a career prosecutor in Detroit whom President Obama has nominated for a district judgeship — was overruled by the unit’s supervisor, Kevin Ohlson, who believed that the report’s “findings of misconduct were supported by the evidence and the law,” according to a cover letter to lawmakers.
Still, Mr. Ohlson said that firing Mr. Bottini and Mr. Goeke was not justified, citing their otherwise exemplary records and that no other prosecutor had been fired for less than intentional misconduct. He proposed suspensions.
Mr. Wainstein, who praised Mr. Berg’s “courage to stand up to the mob,” said a 40-day suspension was disproportionate when compared with similar but less politically fraught cases; Mr. Bottini may seek a reduction, he said.
But lawyers for Mr. Stevens called the suspensions “pathetic,” saying the department had “demonstrated conclusively that it is not capable of disciplining its prosecutors.”
