The death of Frank R. Lautenberg on Monday has left Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey with the kind of opportunity that politicians usually covet: the chance to give away a seat in the United States Senate. But the decision is fraught with pitfalls, none bigger than having to choose between improving his party’s fortunes in Washington and furthering his own political ambitions at home.
Mr. Christie, a Republican, is up for re-election in November and hoping to secure a huge victory margin, which he could then use to accelerate his drive to present himself as a presidential candidate with broad appeal even in a blue state.
But adding a special election for the Senate seat to the ballot could put Mayor Cory A. Booker of Newark at the top of the Democratic ticket, potentially energizing more Democrats, who already outnumber Republicans in New Jersey by 700,000 registered voters, to come to the polls.
The implications extend beyond New Jersey to Washington, where both parties are maneuvering for strategic advantage in a Senate where even a single vote can derail legislation. The appointment of a Republican as the interim replacement for Mr. Lautenberg, a Democrat, would create immediate complications for the White House and Democrats on Capitol Hill as they try to push through presidential nominations and an overhaul of immigration laws under the constant threat of Republican filibuster.
Mr. Lautenberg, a steadfast liberal who was New Jersey’s longest serving senator and the nation’s oldest senator, died of complications from pneumonia in Manhattan. He was 89 and had already announced he would not run for re-election next year.
Mr. Christie, whose popularity soared after Hurricane Sandy, is so eager to avoid appearing on the same ballot as Mr. Booker, according to Republican insiders, that he is considering two alternatives to a November election for Mr. Lautenberg’s successor. Each carries a potential political cost, and the dispute could easily be challenged in court.
The option that is being pushed by many in Mr. Christie’s own party would be to name a Republican to hold the seat and then delay an election on a replacement until 2014. This would give his national party an unexpected gift: a reliable vote in the Senate — for a year and a half, at least — from a state that has not elected a Republican to the upper house in 41 years. But it would also open Mr. Christie up to allegations of sidestepping the electoral process.
The alternative, lawyers in both parties said, would be for Mr. Christie to set a primary election as early as August, which would mean a special election in October. This would leave Democrats in a stronger position to win the seat. Mr. Booker, in particular, benefits from a high national profile and strong fund-raising, though he would be quite likely to face a primary challenge. But it would also open Mr. Christie to accusations that he was wasting some $24 million in taxpayer money by holding those two extra elections ahead of the regular November balloting for self-interested political reasons.
He also risks alienating Republican donors, whom he needs to woo. Mr. Lautenberg’s death came a few days before Mr. Christie is to attend a meeting of some of the biggest Republican fund-raisers, some of whom believe that Mr. Christie’s embrace of President Obama after the hurricane damaged their party’s nominee, Mitt Romney.
“There are probably 49 other governors who would love to be in the position that Chris Christie is in right now,” said Brigid Callahan Harrison, a professor and seasoned observer of New Jersey politics at Montclair State University. “But it really presents him with a Pandora’s box of political choices.”
The high stakes pose a new test for Mr. Christie, who over the last year has made perhaps the most finely tuned calibration between the two parties of any politician in America. After building a reputation as one of the nation’s most visible and popular Republicans, he has won praise and support from Democrats across his state with his criticism of his own party and his praise for Mr. Obama in the aftermath of the hurricane.
Some Democrats said they believed Mr. Christie could see his support among Democrats and independents erode if he appointed a Republican to hold the seat beyond November. “I seriously doubt he would want to have to deal with a lawsuit in his own election year, especially a lawsuit that he might lose,” said one senior Democratic official who requested anonymity in order to not be seen as antagonizing the governor.
The coming days are most likely to be dominated by speculation as to whom Mr. Christie will appoint to the seat. But strategists in both parties agreed the more pressing question for now was when the election would be set.
The list of potential candidates is long, but holds few obvious choices.
Two of the most recent Republican candidates for Senate were both moderate state senators: Joseph M. Kyrillos, who was badly beaten by Senator Robert Menendez last year, and Thomas M. Kean Jr., who lost a closer race against Mr. Menendez in 2006. Dick Zimmer, a former United States congressman, lost to Mr. Lautenberg in 2008.
Mr. Christie could also choose his lieutenant governor, Kim Guadagno, or from among the Republican members of Congress, including the social conservatives Frank A. LoBiondo and Chris H. Smith, or the moderates Rodney P. Frelinghuysen and Leonard J. Lance.
Another option would be to appoint a placeholder candidate who would not seek election to the seat, like former Gov. Thomas H. Kean Sr., who remains one of the state’s most popular political figures. But conservatives are already pushing Mr. Christie to select a candidate who could then run as a credible opponent to Mr. Booker or another Democrat.
If nothing changes, the election this year will feature Mr. Christie at the top of the Republican ticket and Barbara Buono, a state senator from Middlesex County who is struggling to raise money and name recognition, as the Democratic standard-bearer for governor. Republicans believe that Mr. Christie’s popularity — he is far ahead in the polls — would provide a significant advantage in turning out voters for lower-level races, including the entire State Legislature and many county and local seats.
On the Democratic side, Mr. Booker, 44, a two-term mayor of Newark, had already announced his intention to run for the Senate seat next year. Representative Frank J. Pallone Jr., 61, an 11-term congressman from Long Branch with a large campaign war chest, has expressed interest in running against Mr. Booker in a primary contest. (If the governor does not call a special primary election, the state Democratic committee could decide the party’s nominee for a November election to the Senate seat.)
Even as politicians from both parties released statements praising Mr. Lautenberg, the machinations over his seat threatened to overshadow his death. So important was his reliably liberal vote that Democratic leaders asked him twice in recent weeks to return to Washington to vote despite his failing health.
Just last month, Mr. Lautenberg made a special trip to the Capitol to supply a crucial vote that prevented Mr. Obama’s nominee to lead the Environmental Protection Agency from being stalled indefinitely in committee. Republicans were threatening to boycott the vote to deny Democrats a quorum. Mr. Lautenberg agreed to come to provide the quorum.
In another memorable instance in April, his aides helped push him out onto the Senate floor in his wheelchair to cast much-needed “yes” votes for a package of gun-control legislation, a cause he had long supported. Though the bills were ultimately defeated in a Republican-led filibuster, his presence that day served as a reminder of how the majority leader, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, must scrape for almost every vote.
“The last thing Senator Reid can afford right now is to lose a reliable Democratic vote in a highly partisan Senate,” said Jim Manley, a former adviser to the majority leader who served in the Senate when the illnesses of Edward M. Kennedy and Robert C. Byrd caused problems for Democrats, who controlled even fewer seats.
“He’s got a better margin to play with when he did back when Senator Byrd and Senator Kennedy were sick,” Mr. Manley added. “But the fact of the matter is it’s tough to lose a reliable Democratic vote right now.”
Mr. Christie’s appointee will arrive in the Senate as the body prepares to tackle some of the most significant domestic policy issues in years.
Immigration is foremost. It will move to the Senate floor next week. With any significant matter that the Senate takes up these days, the threat of a filibuster all but requires the support of 60 senators, the threshold at which a filibuster can be broken.
Though Republicans and Democrats who support an overhaul to the country’s immigration laws agree that the plan stands a good chance of passing, they have been counting every head, leaving nothing to chance.
Losing a vote is more troublesome in another issue that has drawn both parties into a bitter feud: Republican threats to filibuster several of Mr. Obama’s nominees for cabinet-level positions and the federal judiciary.
But where a single vote could matter the most to Mr. Reid is in his plan to ram through changes to the Senate’s filibuster rules so Republicans are much more limited in how they can block the president’s cabinet and judicial nominees.
