GREENSBORO, N.C. — After more than 45 hours of jury deliberations over eight days, there is still no verdict on whether former Senator John Edwards is guilty of violating federal campaign laws.
But some moments in the courtroom here on Wednesday suggested that perhaps the jury was making progress.
Judge Catherine C. Eagles decided that the four alternate jurors, who had provided their own small sideshow to the tense days of deliberation, could go home to wait out their tour of duty “on standby.” They must still abide by all the restrictions regarding news media consumption and discussions of the case, but they will not have to sit in court day after day.
“We have what I think is the healthiest group of jurors with the fewest scheduling issues that I have seen,” she said.
Judge Eagles also made note of the alternate jurors’ penchant for coordinating the colors of their outfits each day. They have cycled through yellow, red and shades of gray. On Wednesday the color was purple.
“We are going to regret not knowing the color for tomorrow,” she said but cautioned the alternate jurors to contact the court if they were approached by anyone about the case — or even if a friend or family member “blurts something out of substance.” The alternates broke out into enormous smiles. “At least we have four happy people,” the judge said.
Judge Eagles also held three closed court sessions with lawyers, ostensibly to deal with the alternate juror issue and to handle a note from one seated juror with a scheduling issue that will send the jury home at 2:30 p.m. Friday if no verdict has been reached.
Mr. Edwards faces six federal counts connected to about $1 million from two wealthy supporters used to hide his affair with a former campaign videographer, Rielle Hunter. Ms. Hunter and Mr. Edwards conceived a child in 2007 while he was preparing to run for the Democratic presidential nomination.
Mr. Edwards, his daughter Cate and his parents continue to arrive at court each day, walking a gantlet of television cameras and reporters. He appeared more relaxed than usual on Wednesday after having spent Memorial Day at the beach.
When asked how he was doing as he took off his belt and shoes to get through courtroom security, Mr. Edwards replied, “I’m doing all right.”
