Elizabeth Warren, the likely Democratic challenger to Senator Scott P. Brown in the closely watched Senate race in Massachusetts, released statements on Monday night from officials at all of the law schools where she has taught insisting that her hiring was based on merit, not ancestry.
Aides to Mr. Brown have accused Ms. Warren, who teaches at Harvard Law School, of having misled the public by saying she had American Indian ancestors to advance her academic career at a time when law school faculties were under fire for their lack of ethnic and gender diversity.
The issue has dogged Ms. Warren since Friday, when The Boston Herald reported that Harvard in the 1990s had identified her as a member of a minority group to counteract criticism that its faculty was too white and too male. The Brown campaign seized on the story, casting doubt on her claims of American Indian descent and suggesting that she had unfairly exploited the goals of affirmative action programs.
The Warren campaign confirmed on Monday that Ms. Warren had listed herself as a minority member in a legal directory, but that she had done nothing wrong and that Mr. Brown was creating smoke where there was no fire.
The Warren campaign has offered no hard proof that she is of American Indian heritage. But neither has the Brown campaign proved that she has benefited personally from the claim.
On Monday night, officials involved in her hiring at Harvard, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Texas and the University of Houston Law Center all said that she was hired because she was an outstanding teacher, and that her lineage was either not discussed or not a factor.
“To suggest that she needed some special advantage to be hired here or anywhere is just silly,” said Jay Westbrook, chairman of business law at the University of Texas.
Officials at the University of Texas said earlier on Monday that electronic records listed Ms. Warren as white. “Based on a preliminary search of electronic records, her ethnicity group is white,” said Annela Lopez, the university’s open records coordinator.
At a campaign stop earlier Monday, Mr. Brown had sought to distance himself from the controversy while at the same time stoking it. “I haven’t accused her of anything,” Mr. Brown told reporters in South Boston as he encouraged them to continue investigating the matter.
Ms. Warren, who grew up in Oklahoma, has said that her maternal ancestors were members of the Cherokee and Delaware tribes, an assertion that she said was based on “family lore.”
The immediate issue is whether she allowed Harvard Law School to represent her as a minority member in the 1990s when the school was under attack for failing to hire a diverse faculty. The Brown campaign demanded that she “come clean” after it was revealed that Ms. Warren had listed herself as a minority member in a directory of the Association of American Law Schools, a legal reference book, starting in 1986, when she was teaching at the University of Texas, through 1995, when she moved from the University of Pennsylvania to Harvard.
When Ms. Warren was appointed to the Harvard faculty in 1995, The Harvard Crimson hailed the move because she was a woman, with no mention of any ethnic lineage. She became the 10th female professor out of 69 members of the law school faculty, The Crimson said.
The matter erupted Friday when The Boston Herald reported that Harvard Law School identified Ms. Warren in a 1996 article in The Crimson as American Indian in an effort to appear diverse.
Jim Barnett, Mr. Brown’s campaign manager, said Ms. Warren “should apologize for participating in this hypocritical sham.”
Asked whether she disapproved of the law school’s counting her a minority member, Ms. Warren said Friday that she was not aware that it had until “I read it on the front page of The Herald.” She said she was proud of her heritage.
