Millions of dollars in outside money began pouring into Congressional contests around the country in April, while spending by presidential “super PACs” dropped off, according to records filed with the Federal Election Commission on Sunday and other data.
Outside groups, including super PACs and advocacy organizations, have spent at least $7 million on House races and $12.4 million on Senate races since the beginning of April, the first wave in what is expected to be a flood of independent spending this year in the battle for control of Congress.
Some groups, like the Club for Growth and FreedomWorks for America, which push for lower taxes and reduced government spending, spent heavily in primary races between incumbent Republicans and challengers in Utah and Indiana.
Democratic-leaning outside groups also spent money but appeared to be operating at a serious cash disadvantage. House Majority PAC, which seeks to help Democrats reclaim control of the House, had spent $234,000 since March on advertising in a special election in Arizona, where the party hopes to hold on to the seat that Gabrielle Giffords gave up, and $417,000 on a race for an open seat in California.
The Campaign for Primary Accountability, financed by a handful of donors, had waded into five House races since March: two in Pennsylvania, two in Texas and one in Indiana. Unlike some super PACs, the group has not sided with one party, running advertisements against both Democratic and Republican incumbents.
In Kentucky last month, outside groups began a major incursion into a Republican primary in the Fourth Congressional District. Through mid-May, six outside groups — including Club for Growth, the Liberty for All Super PAC and Citizens for a Working America — had spent money for or against one of the candidates.
The super PACs most active in the Republican presidential primaries showed less activity in April as that race all but drew to a close and Mitt Romney, a former Massachusetts governor, began to assert his place as the party’s de facto nominee. Restore Our Future, which spent more than $48 million to help Mr. Romney win the nomination, drastically slowed its work in April, raising $4.6 million and spending less than $3 million.
The Red White and Blue Fund, which backed Rick Santorum for the Republican nomination, had no independent expenditures in April, while Endorse Liberty, which supported Representative Ron Paul of Texas with millions of dollars’ worth of ads at the height of his presidential bid, raised $2,100.
The April filings also reflected the financial struggles of Newt Gingrich, who formally bowed out of the presidential race at the beginning of May. He reported $4.8 million in debt at the end of April, according to campaign records.
Among Mr. Gingrich’s biggest debts were $181,977 for public relations consulting; $165,000 for Web advertising; $1 million to Moby Dick Airways, a charter company; and more than $466,370 for security services. He also owes himself $580,134 for travel expenses.
