COLUMBUS, Ohio — President Obama sought to rekindle the passion of his 2008 victory on Saturday with a pair of huge rallies in battleground states that signaled a new, more politically aggressive phase of the campaign and a sharpened critique of Mitt Romney.
Mr. Obama, speaking to enthusiastic crowds here and in Richmond, Va., said the election offered voters a stark choice between an America “where everyone gets a fair shot” and the Republican vision offered by Mr. Romney, which he said was built on a credo of layoffs, outsourcing, tax avoidance and union busting.
Seeking to link Mr. Romney to Congressional Republicans, the president said the presumptive Republican nominee was their candidate and could be relied on to “rubber-stamp” their agenda, “if he gets the chance.”
“Ohio, I tell you what,” Mr. Obama said, his voice rising, “we cannot give him that chance.” The crowd of 14,000 supporters erupted into cheers and chants of “Four more years!”
Hanging above him was a blue-and-white banner with the word “Forward” — a new slogan the president invoked as a reason to re-elect him and as a rebuke of Mr. Romney, who he said would drag the country back to what he called the failed policies that led to the 2008 financial crisis.
“Governor Romney is a patriotic American who has raised a wonderful family,” Mr. Obama said, before painting the former Massachusetts governor as an out-of-touch plutocrat who he said lectures hard-working Americans on the need to be more productive.
“I don’t care about how many ways you try to explain it,” the president said, mocking a line Mr. Romney once used while campaigning. “Corporations aren’t people. People are people.”
Many of the president’s points were familiar, having been grist for remarks at countless fund-raisers. But these rallies — at Virginia Commonwealth University and Ohio State University — provided him with his first chance to shrug off the tension between governing and campaigning and plunge into campaign mode.
Appearing without a jacket or tie, his preferred look during his first campaign, Mr. Obama spoke with a combative tone, his voice becoming hoarse toward the end, as he pleaded for support for another four years in office.
As reinforcement, Mr. Obama brought along his wife, Michelle, to introduce him. The first lady, wearing a turquoise dress that almost matched the sea of blue placards, tried to warm up the crowd with a slogan from 2008.
“It sounds like you all are already fired up and ready to go,” she said to a swell of cheers. “Let me tell you, I’m pretty fired up and ready to go myself.”
Recounting the story of her father’s struggles to put her and her brother through college, Mrs. Obama said her husband was fighting for an America where everybody gets a shot at success.
The atmosphere at both rallies was buoyant and the crowds were sizable, though in Columbus the turnout did not fill the Schottenstein Center’s 18,300 seats. David Plouffe, a senior adviser to the president, said he was happy with the crowds at this point noting that they dwarfed those that turned out for Mr. Romney.
At times, the rallies had the feeling of a concert by an aging rock star: a few supporters were wearing faded “Hope” and Obama 2008 T-shirts, and cheers went up when the president told people to tell their friends that this campaign was “still about hope” and “still about change.”
The rallies came at the end of a week that showcased some of Mr. Obama’s greatest strengths and most acute weaknesses: his national security and counterterrorism credentials — on display during a surprise visit to Afghanistan on the first anniversary of the raid that killed Osama bin Laden — and his stewardship of the economy, called into question yet again by Friday’s weak employment report.
Mr. Romney did not campaign on Saturday, yielding the spotlight to the president. And Mr. Obama deployed the full trappings of his office, flying in Air Force One and riding in his armored limousine, flags flapping from the fenders.
A Romney spokeswoman, Andrea Saul, said in a statement: “No matter how many lofty campaign speeches President Obama gives, the fact remains that American families are struggling on his watch: to pay their bills, find a job and keep their homes.”
The president drew some of his loudest applause when he spoke of ending the war in Iraq and of the raid that killed Bin Laden. “By 2014,” he said, “the war in Afghanistan will be over.”
He also struck a chord on women’s issues. “We don’t need another political fight about ending a woman’s right to choose, or getting rid of Planned Parenthood or taking away access to affordable birth control,” he said to noisy cheers. “I want women to control their own health choices.”
While Mr. Obama defended other elements of his record, including the health care law that is in legal jeopardy at the Supreme Court, he devoted most of his remarks to trying to define Mr. Romney before Mr. Romney has a chance to define himself to voters. Campaign advisers said the president would hammer at his opponent in coming weeks.
“For the American people, the next few months will be sort of an intense burrowing in on the candidates, though more on Romney than on us, because they know us,” said David Axelrod, a senior Obama campaign strategist. “Views will not set, but be hardened over the summer. By the time you get to Labor Day, I don’t think you’re going to be able to change impressions greatly over the fall.”
In Ohio, digital gizmos lent the rally the techno-dazzle of an Apple product introduction. Attendees could have their pictures taken and posted on a giant screen during the rally. They sent text messages to register for “Backstage with Barack,” a drawing to meet the president. There was also a mobile field office, where supporters sampled life as a volunteer in a campaign office.
No amount of show business, however, can replicate the euphoria of 2008, as some in the audience acknowledged. Roshni Patel, 19, from Columbus, said “the excitement is still high, though maybe not as high as four years ago.” But she said students credited Mr. Obama with trying to create jobs and fighting to keep interest rates low on student loans. “That means a lot to me personally,” she said.
Ms. Patel said she had not really focused much on Mr. Romney, but was inclined to stick with Mr. Obama. “People really think he’s done a lot,” she said. “He killed Bin Laden.”
