

                    The Republican National Convention continues Wednesday in Tampa, Fla., and The New York Times will provide live, comprehensive coverage of the events, people and politics on the Web and mobile devices and in print. Among the highlights:        

                    News        

                    TimesCast Politics At 2 and 7 p.m. each day, our live video broadcast from Tampa will take readers behind the scenes with newsmaker interviews, analysis from Times journalists and stories exploring various aspects of the campaign.        

                    Voter Portraits A collection of photos and voices from potential voters.        

                    Convention Speeches Watch the major addresses live on the Web and mobile devices. Come back each morning for speech highlights and annotated video and transcripts.        

                    Live Blog Starting around 7 p.m., Times reporters, editors and photographers will provide real-time news, analysis and scenes from the hall.        

                    Photo Slide Shows        

                    A daily look at the people, places and events.        

                    Convention Storybook On Friday, a narrated multimedia presentation featuring highlights from the convention.        

                    Election 2012 App The latest news from The Times and other top sources. Plus opinion, polls, campaign data and live video.        

                    The Caucus Blog Updates, interviews and vignettes throughout the day.        

Social Media For on-the-ground reporting, follow the Times political team on Facebook at Facebook.com/nytimespolitics and on Twitter at @thecaucus. Find more Times journalists on Twitter at nytimes.com/politics.        

                    Opinion        

                    TimesCast Opinion Charles M. Blow hosts daily conversations with other columnists and editorial board members.        

                    Google+ Hangouts Frank Bruni and Gail Collins talk to voters from around the country and across the spectrum.        

                    The Conversation, on Video Gail Collins and David Brooks tackle the campaign live from Tampa.        

                    Op-Docs The comedian and commentator Mo Rocca hosts ''Electoral Dysfunction,'' a video series.        

                    Columns, Editorials and Blogs Op-Ed columnists and editorial board members provide analysis and commentary, and dispatches on the Campaign Stops and Taking Note blogs.        

                    Room for Debate Tom Brokaw, David Gergen and others discuss how to improve conventions. Later in the week, experts debate whether Republican calls for budget cuts are too risky right now.        

                    Twitter The Opinion section (nytimes.com/opinion) will host highly opinionated Twitter messages from Op-Ed columnists including Charles M. Blow, Ross Douthat, Frank Bruni, left, and Bill Keller, right, and editorial board members.        



PHOTOS

 GRAPHIC 


 

