In an advertisement released this month by President Obama’s campaign, Mitt Romney and the private equity firm he co-founded, Bain Capital, are painted as vampires. They sucked the lifeblood out of GST Steel in the 1990s, which pushed it into bankruptcy, destroying jobs and eliminating pensions.
In a quick counterattack, the Romney campaign released an ad that highlighted the robust job growth at another Bain investment, the manufacturing company Steel Dynamics. The ad featured employees who said the investment had helped them achieve the American dream.
So, which version of private equity is true? The answer, of course, is both. The business of private equity firms is buying and selling companies, all done with the goal of earning big returns for themselves and their investors. Sometimes that means jobs are created; sometimes it means jobs are lost.
In fact, job creation was actually never part of the industry’s mission statement, just a nice happenstance if it occurred.
The world of private equity is a nuanced, complicated business that will never be fully captured in anybody’s ads this political season. Yet, despite the debate swirling around it, private equity plays a central role in the economy.
Each day when millions of Americans eat at Burger King, stay at a Hilton hotel, or visit an HCA-owned hospital, whether they know it or not, they are intersecting with private equity.
The industry has exploded in scale and scope in recent years with some $3 trillion in global assets. The 2,600 private equity firms in the United States are invested in 15,300 companies and employ about 8 million people, according to the Private Equity Growth Capital Council, the industry’s lobbying arm. Some of the largest private equity firms — the Blackstone Group, the Carlyle Group, and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company — oversee global empires that rival some of the mightiest public corporations.
Yet more than three decades after private equity burst onto the scene in the merger mania of the 1980s, the industry remains as mysterious and controversial as ever.
“The industry has done a terrible job of explaining what it does, and now it has this bright spotlight being shown on it that no one really ever anticipated,” said Colin C. Blaydon, director of the Center for Private Equity and Entrepreneurship at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth.
It is said that private equity is a business of other people’s money. Most private equity firms raise money from outside investors that they then combine with large amounts of money borrowed by the companies they are acquiring. Sometimes they install new management and wring out excess costs, which can include slashing jobs. Other times they invest in new plants and create new jobs. After a few years, they either sell the company or take it public again, ideally at a profit.
Buyout firms make their money through three different avenues: They charge their investors an annual management fee; they earn a share of any profits; and they can take lucrative advisory and other fees from the companies they acquire.
Those fat fees have caused many of private equity’s detractors to say the industry has minted millionaires and even a handful of billionaires at the expense of ordinary Americans.
In their eyes, private equity is still the “Barbarians at the Gate,” a book about the late 1980s buyout of RJR Nabisco, and its preferred modus operandi is “stripping and flipping.”
That robber baron image was not helped a few years ago when the Blackstone Group co-founder Stephen A. Schwarzman gave himself a multimillion-dollar birthday party that included a performance by Rod Stewart.
Still, the titans of the industry argue that they save and create jobs by sometimes acquiring troubled companies that might have gone under if not for the new money and fresh ideas private equity injected into them.
As for the notion that the buyout titans are enriching only themselves, they are quick to point out that their biggest investors are public pension funds that are seeking high returns to pay benefits down the road to state and municipal retirees.
On the question of whether private equity has created more jobs than it has eliminated, one of the most-quoted academic studies comes out basically a wash. A study by researchers from Harvard, the University of Chicago and elsewhere of private-equity-owned companies from 1980 to 2005 concluded that private equity did not add more jobs than other companies, but it did not shed significantly more jobs either.
Other recent studies suggest that some of the more controversial practices of private equity may not do as much harm as is often perceived. For instance, critics have long hammered private equity as loading companies up with mountains of debt that often leaves them teetering on the edge of the financial abyss.
But a study released last year by a group of researchers that examined companies with high levels of debt between 1997 and 2010 showed private-equity-owned companies did not default at higher levels than their similarly burdened counterparts.
The same study also said that the often-vilified practice of companies issuing new debt in order to pay dividends to their buyout owners also did not put the companies at greater financial peril.
Still, one area of criticism that continues to dog the private equity leaders and firms is their low tax rate. The hefty borrowings that companies take on during a buyout often provide the private equity firms with tax-deductible interest payments.
In addition, the fees the industry earns if it hits performance targets is taxed at the lower 15 percent capital gains rate. Ordinary income, like wages and salaries, are subject to a tax rate of up to 35 percent.
Behind the scenes, private equity officials say the industry has evolved. They argue that state officials who oversee public pension money have pressured them to improve the operations of the companies they own rather than rely on balance-sheet somersaults to make their returns.
As for the dueling ads, in the case of GST Steel, a manufacturer based in Kansas City, Mo., that Bain bought in 1993, the company, according to a Reuters article this year, issued new debt that was used to pay tens of millions of dollars in dividends to its buyout owners. That sent GST’s debt levels and interest payments soaring, which eventually pushed it into bankruptcy.
When the bankruptcy was announced, the company also said that it was shutting down a mill, resulting in the loss of hundreds of jobs, and that it would not provide workers with severance pay, health insurance and other benefits. The company’s underfunded pension was eventually bailed out by the federal government. But not explored in the campaign ad is that GST was a company already well in decline in an industry under pressure from cheap global product before Bain acquired it and pumped money into it. It was one of many steel manufacturers that filed for bankruptcy during the period.
“Mitt Romney retired from Bain Capital over 13 years ago,” Bain said in a statement, “but we understand that in a political campaign our exemplary 28-year record will be distorted and complex business situations will be portrayed in a simplistic way.”
