The United States quietly passed a milestone this spring, mostly lost amid the clamor of the presidential race: for the first time, neither party’s candidate is a white Protestant. The contenders are both from outsider groups that were once persecuted, and despite Harvard degrees and notable successes, both men have felt the sting of being treated as somehow strange or different.
The campaigns have mostly been in a state of détente on identity politics, trying to avoid mutually assured destruction. But the outsider backgrounds of Barack Obama and Mitt Romney have marked the race in subtler ways, shaping the candidates and campaigns, causing them to mirror each other in many ways.
Both sides face the specter of longstanding prejudices that no ad, slogan or speech may be able to dispel. In a Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey conducted last week, 27 percent of those polled said that having a Mormon president raised concerns for them or someone they know, and 12 percent said the same for a black president. Some voters say outright that they will not vote for Mr. Obama because he is black; others make jokes about Mr. Romney belonging to a cult.
“They’re both dealing with the unknown: how far has the country progressed?” said the Rev. Al Sharpton in an interview.
In public, both sides avow that the campaign is about substantive issues, and that religion and race will not determine who wins. In private, those close to Mr. Romney express concerns about faith that sound uncannily like those of their Democratic counterparts on race. Mr. Romney’s friends and aides frequently ask whether some of the things said and written about him would be uttered about a candidate of another religion. (“Would you have written this about a Jewish candidate?” his aides often ask reporters.) In interviews, some of his friends wished aloud for an organization like the Anti-Defamation League to patrol public discourse for anti-Mormon statements.
Their comments echo those of some Obama aides, who are nagged by the suspicion that he would be treated differently if he were white. (“Would this have been said about Bill Clinton?” is the question they often ask.) The subject came up again last week, when Representative Mike Coffman, Republican of Colorado, said that Mr. Obama was “not an American,” then apologized.
There are also parallels between the two candidates themselves, like their elliptical language: In a speech at Liberty University this month, Mr. Romney talked about his faith without ever saying “Mormon.” Weighing in on the racially fraught Trayvon Martin case, the president never used the word “black,” instead saying, indirectly but with clear feeling, “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon.”
And Mr. Obama does not want to answer for past statements by his former pastor, the Rev. Jeremiah A. Wright Jr. (including some that many voters find offensive), just as Mr. Romney does not want to be held accountable for every policy of his church (including some that many voters find offensive).
For the president, the legacy of the blowup over Mr. Wright in 2008 has been a drawing inward and greater caution on matters relating to race. Mr. Obama, who once wrote a lyrical memoir about racial identity and taught a class called Race and the Law, learned on the campaign trail just how toxic anything related to his personal experience of race or religion could become. He declined to join a church in Washington; his aides feared triggering the same kind of fracas that engulfed his old one. Mr. Romney is just as reticent, sticking to brief statements that emphasize that Mormons are Christians who believe in Jesus Christ.
Their approaches are safe but also somewhat obscuring. Being the first black president is one of the richest, most singular veins of Mr. Obama’s experience, but he almost never lets the country know what it is like. Mr. Romney has called being a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints one of his chief influences, and yet he does not reveal whatever emotion, lessons or moral force he derives from faith. Neither man is a voluble, heart-on-sleeve politician to begin with, and refusing to discuss central aspects of their identities can make each seem yet more remote.
After one successful campaign and three plus years in the White House, Mr. Obama and his team’s painful early internal debates on how to handle race have given way to more settled patterns. But Mr. Romney’s camp is divided on the question of how much he should speak about his personal faith. Some in his circles, including many Mormons, argue that his religion is nothing to hide and helps mitigate the caricature of him as a cruel capitalist. Mr. Romney’s political advisers, few of whom are Mormon, are more cautious, arguing that religion should be off the table.
“We as a society have decided to judge people on their actions and not based on where they go to church or the color of their skin,” said Stuart Stevens, Mr. Romney’s top strategist. “It’s true when you apply for a job, it’s true when you apply for a driver’s license and it should be true when you run for president.”
The reluctance of Mr. Romney and his team may be warranted. Many Mormons found his first run for president deeply troubling because they anticipated a new benchmark of acceptance in American society. Instead they encountered the kinds of hostile reactions they thought had mostly vanished, like a 2006 article on Slate.com in which Jacob Weisberg argued that Joseph Smith was a “con man” and the religion a “transparent and recent fraud.”
“A lot of our people were surprised and disappointed” that that point of view was still acceptable, said Michael Otterson, a spokesman for the church, which does not endorse candidates.
To Richard Lyman Bushman, a leading historian of Mormonism who has known the candidate since they served together in the church decades ago, Mr. Romney’s quest is the latest stage in a process that began over a century ago, when Mormons banned polygamy, opening the way to mainstream acceptance. Now, Professor Bushman said, the national judgment on the religion can be summarized by the musical “Book of Mormon,” which depicts church members as sweet, hardworking people with outlandish but harmless beliefs.
In 2008, a single question hung over the Obama campaign until election night: Would the country vote for a black man? Now Mr. Romney faces his own version.
“If a Mormon is a doctor, or teaching your kids, or even the leader of the Senate, that’s fine,” Professor Bushman said. “But president? The emblem of the country?”
