BOSTON — The half-court basketball shot that Senator Scott P. Brown sank on Friday during a visit to a youth center — recorded by his staff and widely circulated on the Web — was just the beginning.
So far this week, Mr. Brown, a Republican, has won endorsements by Democratic former mayors of Boston and Worcester, given a speech emphasizing his votes across party lines and released a radio ad calling on Americans to “work together now” despite partisan differences.
By contrast, Elizabeth Warren, his main Democratic challenger for the United States Senate seat once held by Edward M. Kennedy, has been engulfed in controversy stemming from accusations by the Brown camp that she sought an unfair advantage in her academic career by claiming American Indian ancestry. For the last two days, she has kept a low profile in Massachusetts, though she spoke at a union convention in Washington on Tuesday.
 The Warren campaign says this political moment is of little consequence compared with those involving health care and student loans that middle-class voters face every day. “These are the moments that Elizabeth Warren cares about — they are why she is running for Senate — not manufactured moments in a long political campaign,” said Kyle Sullivan, a spokesman for Ms. Warren.
Political analysts are divided about the importance of the ancestry issue and whether it represents a turning point in a race in which the polls have shown the candidates running neck and neck. But as Ms. Warren, a first-time candidate, faces a test in how she deals with a potential crisis, Mr. Brown has seized the momentum.
“He’s touring the state touting his bipartisanship while she’s on the defensive with a diversity issue,” said Peter Ubertaccio, a professor of political science at Stonehill College in Easton, Mass. “The juxtaposition is not good for her.”
The trouble started Friday, when The Boston Herald reported that Harvard Law School, where Ms. Warren teaches, had cited her as a member of a minority group in an effort to counteract criticism that its faculty was too white and too male. Then over the weekend, it was revealed that Ms. Warren had in the past listed herself as a minority member in a national legal directory.
The Brown campaign pounced, saying that by representing herself as a minority member, Ms. Warren had unfairly exploited the goals of affirmative action programs and raised questions about her credibility. “Professor Warren needs to come clean about her motivations for making these claims,” said Jim Barnett, Mr. Brown’s campaign manager.
The Warren campaign responded that she had done nothing wrong. Aides said she had listed herself as a minority member in the legal directory because she was proud of her heritage. (The listing covered the period from 1986, when she was teaching at the University of Texas, through 1995, when she moved from the University of Pennsylvania to Harvard.)
At the union event in Washington on Tuesday, Ms. Warren took Mr. Brown to task for opposing the federal health care law while using it to his family’s benefit. Mr. Brown acknowledged in a Boston Globe article that he has used a provision of President Obama’s health care law to cover his 23-year-old daughter, even though he voted against the bill shortly after winning the 2010 special election for the Senate.
Some analysts said the ancestry issue would not hurt Ms. Warren, who has raised a staggering amount of money since entering the race last September. Maurice Cunningham, a political scientist at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, described the accusations as “trivial.”
“The number of Massachusetts citizens who are going to be worrying about her heritage, with the economy still slowly recovering, is probably pretty minuscule,” he said.
But David Paleologos, a pollster at Suffolk University in Boston, said it seemed unlikely that Ms. Warren could move past the issue unless she addressed it head on. “Now, it’s like every day there’s some new discovery or some new twist,” he said. “It’s not even about ancestry anymore; it’s about gaming the system and why did you do this?”
Mr. Ubertaccio said that on the one hand, he believed Ms. Warren should provide a fuller explanation of why she listed herself as a minority member in the legal directory. But on the other, he said that if he were advising her campaign, “I’d also be thinking to myself, ‘We don’t want to be overreacting to these kind of one-off events.’ I do think this issue isn’t going to last.”
