WASHINGTON — It has been a dreadful winter for Democrats as red state incumbents struggle to overcome President Obama’s sagging popularity. But there’s one person in particular Democrats still hope to beat: Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader.
Polls say Mr. McConnell is locked in a dead heat for re-election in Kentucky. Some surveys even show him trailing Alison Lundergan Grimes, his Democratic challenger. But the polls overstate his vulnerability.
A McConnell defeat would be all but unprecedented.
Mr. McConnell is not only an incumbent senator who represents the party opposed to the White House in a midterm election, but he also comes from a state that opposes the president. Since 1956, only seven senators in these circumstances have lost re-election. The last time was in 1998, when John Edwards defeated Senator Lauch Faircloth in North Carolina.
But 2014 is not 1998. Back then, President Bill Clinton’s approval rating was in the mid-60s. Today, President Obama’s ratings are mired in the low 40s. Kentucky is also not North Carolina, which only narrowly voted against Mr. Clinton. Kentucky is an extremely favorable state for a Republican candidate: It voted for Romney and McCain by an average of 25 points to the right of the country.
From that perspective, there is no precedent for a McConnell defeat. No senator has lost in a state as favorable as Kentucky when the president represents the other party. And it’s not even close: North Carolina, it turns out, is the closest example. States with serious reservations about the incumbent president seem unwilling to dismiss the president’s opponents in the Senate.
Very few incumbent senators lose re-election in states as favorable as Kentucky, period. Since 1956, only one incumbent senator has lost re-election in a state more favorable than Kentucky under any circumstance. That senator was Ted Stevens, who was convicted on seven counts of corruption just one week before the 2008 election, in a tough year for Republicans. Despite all of that, he lost by only one percentage point. He is the exception that seems to prove the rule.
Mr. McConnell, of course, is not a convicted felon. And unlike Mr. Stevens, Mr. McConnell comfortably won re-election in worst-case circumstances in 2008, just one month after shepherding TARP, the bank bailout package, to passage in the Senate. Since then, Mr. Obama has alienated eastern Kentucky’s coal country, traditionally the most Democratic-leaning stretch of the state. Without those voters, it is unclear whether there’s still a path to victory for Democrats seeking federal office.
Yet the polls show a close race. So long as that’s true, Ms. Grimes can’t be counted out.
Still, most surveys show Ms. Grimes, Kentucky’s secretary of state, polling in the low-to-mid 40s. That’s not bad, but each of the last three Democratic Senate candidates in Kentucky reached 44 percent of the vote. To win, Ms. Grimes needs to make inroads into Kentucky’s Republican-leaning voters, and, so far, it hasn’t happened.
Campaigns tend to move partisans toward their respective corners. Campaign advertisements, messages, and even gaffes, emphasize the ideological differences between the candidates and polarize voters along party lines. Mr. McConnell will spend the next eight months reminding voters that he’s the president’s most reliable adversary, and that control of the Senate is at stake. That message seems likely to resonate with Kentucky’s anti-Obama electorate.
This article is a preview of The Upshot, a New York Times site dedicated to demystifying politics, economics and other subjects. It will debut on nytimes.com this spring. To learn more, follow David Leonhardt on Facebook and Twitter. You can also follow Nate Cohn, a reporter for The Upshot, on Twitter.
