President Obama’s once-commanding fund-raising advantage is declining as major Republican donors rally for Mitt Romney, conservative “super PACs” far outpace their liberal counterparts and tax-exempt issue-advocacy groups swarm the political landscape.
With Republican Congressional committees largely keeping pace with the Democrats, Mr. Obama and his Democratic allies appear increasingly likely to be matched or even outspent by Republican and conservative groups — a far cry from 2008, when Mr. Obama outspent Senator John McCain by more than two to one and super PACs did not exist. All told, Mr. Obama, Congressional Democrats and liberal groups have raised at least $547 million in this election cycle while Mr. Romney, Congressional Republicans, and the top conservative outside groups have raised at least $462 million, according to a review of reports filed with the Federal Election Commission through Sunday and interviews with officials.
Those figures do not account for all the money spent through tax-exempt issue-advocacy organizations that are not required to disclose their spending, like Americans for Prosperity, founded by the billionaire Koch brothers, who have reportedly pledged to steer at least $200 million to conservative advocacy groups by Election Day. Nor does it include money spent directly by unions this cycle.
But even as the gap narrows, Republican and Democratic expenditures reflect starkly different bets on how to best spend money in the race’s first phases. Mr. Obama has used his early cash reserves to finance the creation of a massive political and technological infrastructure, placing field workers in swing states and using sophisticated data-mining techniques to rebuild his winning coalition from 2008. And while Mr. Romney battled for the Republican nomination, conservative super PACs and issue groups spent most of their millions on advertisements pounding Mr. Obama.
With no primaries, Mr. Obama and the Democratic National Committee spent $338 million through April, relatively little of it on attack ads. (That figure does not include a $25 million advertising blitz against Mr. Romney that Mr. Obama announced this month.) In April alone, for example, the Democrats’ national party committees transferred $827,439 to the OhioDemocratic Party, including substantial cash and payments covering phones and computer equipment. The Democratic National Committee and other party committees also put $789,515 into Florida.
Mr. Romney, who spent most of the last year winning his party’s nomination, and the Republican National Committee, which entered the cycle saddled with large debts, spent a total of $192 million during the same period. In April, the national committee transferred just $44,500 to the Florida Republican Party.
Long before the Republican primary battle drew to a close last month, Republican-aligned groups were spending heavily on advertisements to soften Mr. Obama up. Crossroads Grassroots Policy Strategies, a tax-exempt group affiliated with the American Crossroads super PAC, has spent at least $27 million on advertising since the beginning of last year, officials there said, much of it focused on Mr. Obama. Last week, Crossroads announced that it would buy $25 million more worth of ads, a monthlong campaign spread over 10 states.
Now both sides are broadening their political playbooks. In recent months, Mr. Obama’s allies have appealed to liberal donors to pour money into Democratic-leaning super PACs, petrified by the hundreds of millions of dollars expected to be spent on the airwaves against the president this summer and fall.
And Mr. Romney and the Republican National Committee, banking on the large cash reserves accumulated by conservative super PACs in recent months, are now seeking to rapidly build a field operation that can match those of Mr. Obama and the unions backing him and other Democrats. The national committee spent more on payroll in March than it had in any month since 2011; it also spent heavily on raising money from small donors and generating grass-roots support.
Mr. Romney has kept up an aggressive fund-raising schedule in recent weeks, including a swing through Florida last week that took in more than $8 million in two days and a New York trip this week that is expected to bring in as much as $20 million, according to one person involved with the planning.
“They’ve been waiting for a candidate,” said Mel Sembler, a Florida developer who is among the leading Republican fund-raisers in the country. “Now there’s a candidate.”
In a marked turn from just a few months ago, when Mr. Romney’s campaign warned supporters that he would be smothered by a billion-dollar Obama machine, his top fund-raisers appear confident that they can compete with Mr. Obama.
“We were expecting Obama to bury us three to one or four to one,” said Woody Johnson, one of Mr. Romney’s top fund-raisers, at one of Tuesday’s events in New York, held at the Waldorf-Astoria. “There is a reason we are so close,” he suggested: People are unhappy with the Obama administration.
Indeed, while Mr. Obama continues to hold enormous reserves — his campaign’s most recent filing showed $115 million in the bank — Mr. Romney effectively matched his fund-raising pace for the first time in April, thanks to a new joint fund-raising agreement that allows him to raise large checks for the Republican National Committee and Republican state organizations. As an incumbent without party opposition, Mr. Obama could hold joint fund-raisers throughout the cycle.
Mr. Obama’s early fund-raising lead has posed his campaign an unexpected challenge: They have had difficulty persuading many large donors that Mr. Obama is in peril.
On Twitter on Sunday, David Axelrod, Mr. Obama’s top strategist, reacted with disdain to a news report suggesting that Mr. Romney would merely catch up with Mr. Obama.
“With SuperPacs in mix?” Mr. Axelrod’s message said. “Slam dunk Team Romney will outspend us.”
