SOMERVILLE, Mass. — In a last-minute change of heart, Gov. Deval Patrick of Massachusetts, who said last year that he would stay neutral in the race against Senator Scott P. Brown until Democrats had settled on a candidate, endorsed the embattled Elizabeth Warren on Wednesday.
The unexpected move, announced at a contentious news conference at Warren headquarters here, came just days before the state Democratic Party is to hold its convention. Delegates are expected to back Ms. Warren, but they may also give enough support to another candidate, Marisa DeFranco, to allow her a spot on the September primary ballot to challenge Ms. Warren.
Mr. Patrick said he still expected Ms. DeFranco to win the necessary 15 percent of delegates to get on the ballot, but he said he wanted to help Ms. Warren focus on beating Mr. Brown in November. “It’s time for us to turn our attention to our Republican opponent and not be so focused on each other,” he said. He called Mr. Brown “a very, very effective campaigner.”
Republicans cast the 11th-hour endorsement as a desperation move by Democrats to shore up support for Ms. Warren, a Harvard Law School professor, who has been under intense scrutiny over whether she unfairly claimed she was a minority to advance her academic career. She has said she is part American Indian, though she has provided no evidence to support that assertion.
“Must be panic time at Warren HQ,” Eric Fehrnstrom, a top strategist for Mr. Brown’s Senate campaign — as well as for Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign — wrote on Twitter.
While recent polling shows Ms. Warren running dead even with Mr. Brown, questions about her heritage have consumed the campaign.
Mr. Patrick, who polls indicate is one of the most popular politicians in the state, surprised everyone when he sent out an e-mail on Wednesday afternoon telling supporters that he was endorsing Ms. Warren. He said she shared his “politics of conviction.”
A few minutes later, the Warren campaign gave the news media about 90 minutes’ notice that Mr. Patrick would appear at her headquarters and that they would hold a news conference.
This raised expectations that Ms. Warren might discuss her ancestry in greater detail than she has. But the event was orchestrated to discourage detailed questioning by including about 150 loyal Warren supporters who booed when reporters asked about it.
At the event, Mr. Patrick called Mr. Brown “a charming man and a better politician, frankly, than any of us anticipated he would be, given his performance in the Statehouse.”
But, he said, Mr. Brown “has made very different choices, the kind that don’t help people,” pointing to his “votes against summer jobs for our young people, against ending billions of dollars in subsidies to oil and gas companies that don’t need them.”
Mr. Patrick was asked if his endorsement was a sign that Ms. Warren’s campaign was in trouble. “Nope,” he replied.
A reporter said to Ms. Warren that critics were calling her character into question, prompting the supporters in the room to boo and hiss.
Mr. Patrick told them that “even when we don’t like the question, we’ve got to let it be asked.” Turning back to the news media, he said, “We don’t care about that subject.”
Asked whether the issue spoke to Ms. Warren’s character, Mr. Patrick said, “I think I have answered that.”
“Can she answer it?” the reporter said.
Ms. Warren said she would defer to the governor.
“So, you’re not answering, basically?” the reporter asked. Ms. Warren replied, “You just don’t like the answer.”
