WASHINGTON — A day after Mitt Romney said that he paid at least 13 percent of his income in taxes each year, President Obama’s campaign manager on Friday said five years’ worth of Mr. Romney’s tax returns would satisfy Democrats.
Jim Messina, Mr. Obama’s campaign manager, offered a deal in an open letter to his counterpart, saying that if Mr. Romney released his tax returns from 2007 to 2011, Democrats would promise not to demand any more.
“If the governor will release five years of returns, I commit in turn that we will not criticize him for not releasing more — neither in ads nor in other public communications or commentary for the rest of the campaign,” Mr. Messina wrote to Matt Rhoades, Mr. Romney’s campaign manager.
Mr. Messina said the offer should satisfy Mr. Romney’s oft-stated concerns that his adversaries will always continue to ask for more and more. But Mr. Messina pointedly did not promise that Democrats would hold their fire on the contents of the tax returns.
He said a release of five years would “help answer outstanding questions raised by the one return he has released to date, such as the range in the effective rates paid, the foreign accounts maintained, the foreign investments made, and the types of tax shelters used.”
Mr. Rhoades was quick with a response Friday morning, but did not say whether Mr. Romney would commit to a release of any additional tax returns.
“It is clear that President Obama wants nothing more than to talk about Governor Romney’s tax returns instead of the issues that matter to voters, like putting Americans back to work, fixing the economy and reining in spending,” Mr. Rhoades wrote in a response released to reporters. “If Governor Romney’s tax returns are the core message of your campaign, there will be ample time for President Obama to discuss them over the next 81 days.
The offer came a day after Mr. Romney once again confronted the vexing issue of his taxes, which Democrats have used to portray him as out of touch with middle-class values.
Mr. Romney made the remarks at a hastily arranged news conference at an airport in South Carolina, calling the interest in his personal tax returns “small-minded” in light of the nation’s problems. Nonetheless, he said that he had examined the last 10 years of his personal tax returns after Democrats suggested that he might not have paid anything at all in some years.
“Every year, I’ve paid at least 13 percent,” he said, referring to his effective federal income tax rate, which is a higher effective rate than most people pay.
Mr. Romney’s decision Thursday to address the tax question appeared to be an off-the-cuff attempt to put the nettlesome issue behind him once and for all. But at least initially, it had the opposite effect. Democrats seized on his comments to revive the issue and to once again demand proof of his claims by releasing multiple years of his tax returns.
The re-emergence of the tax issue consumed another day of the campaign and added to the sense of a shift in direction for a candidate who had once steadfastly refused to talk about anything other than job losses during Mr. Obama’s tenure, the unemployment rate and the nation’s growing debt.
Now, after Mr. Romney’s decision to name Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin as his vice-presidential choice, the campaign is instead waging an aggressive battle on Medicare, welfare and Mr. Obama’s character. That change in focus can be seen in the campaign’s ads and in Mr. Romney’s speeches. And it stands in contrast to the approaches of some Republican Congressional candidates, who said Thursday that they intended to wage their own campaigns strictly on economic issues.
“We are staying on our message,” said Chris Collins, the Republican candidate in New York’s 27th District, near Buffalo. Mr. Collins said that Republicans should welcome the Medicare debate, but that in his own campaign, “every time anything comes up, I bring it back to the economy, the economy, Obamacare.”
Richard Tisei, a Republican running in Massachusetts’ Sixth District, said that for Mr. Romney and Republicans, “ultimately, the campaign is going to be about the state of the economy.”
At the news conference Thursday, Mr. Romney had sought to amplify the Medicare argument he has been making in earnest since selecting Mr. Ryan. To drive home his point on the difference in the approaches to Medicare by the Republican ticket and the Obama administration, Mr. Romney drew numbers on a white board positioned on an easel before television cameras.
It was a moment that delighted aides back at his campaign headquarters in Boston — until Mr. Romney answered a reporter’s question about his income taxes. For the rest of the day, his statement that he has paid at least 13 percent in federal income taxes over the past decade received more attention than his original statement on Medicare.
Democrats have hounded Mr. Romney for months about his tax returns. Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, has asserted — without providing any proof — that Mr. Romney paid no taxes in some years.
Mr. Romney had already denounced the remarks as false. But he has steadfastly refused to release more than his full return for the 2010 tax year and a short summary of taxes he paid in 2011. In an interview on NBC’s “Rock Center” that was broadcast Thursday night, Ann Romney stood by her husband’s refusal, saying that further releases would simply provide “ammunition” for Democrats.
“The more we get attacked, the more we get questioned, the more we get pushed,” Mrs. Romney said. “There’s going to be no more tax releases given. Mitt is honest. His integrity is just golden.”
In an interview last month, Mr. Romney was asked whether he had ever paid a tax rate lower than the 13.9 percent he paid in 2010.
“I haven’t calculated that,” he told David Muir of ABC News. “I’m happy to go back and look, but my view is I’ve paid all the taxes required by law.”
In saying that he paid a tax rate of at least 13 percent, Mr. Romney and his wife would still have had a higher income tax rate than most households. More than 46 percent of households did not pay any federal income tax in 2011 because their income was low enough that deductions and credits reduced their bill to zero. Even a typical household making $100,000 a year would pay closer to a 10 percent average federal income tax rate than a 15 percent rate, Congressional Budget office data suggest.
For many middle-class households, however, other taxes — like payroll taxes and state and local taxes — typically cause their total annual tax rate to rise to 20 percent of their income and higher. For Mr. Romney, these other taxes most likely had only a small effect on his total tax rate, because much of his income came from investments, which is generally taxed at a lower rate than wage income.
In 2011, Mr. Obama and his wife reported an effective federal income tax rate of 20.5 percent. In 2010, their rate was just over 26 percent.
In the brief exchange with reporters in South Carolina, Mr. Romney used a black marker to sketch out his assertion that the president had cut $716 billion out of the Medicare program “to fund Obamacare.” But the tax question came a few moments later, and he eagerly answered it.
“Campaigns don’t control their own destiny,” said Dave Carney, a Republican strategist who managed the presidential campaign of Gov. Rick Perry of Texas. “You can talk about what you want, but you have to be relevant to the ongoing discussion.”
