WASHINGTON — For the Congressional chamber where bills usually go to die, the Senate is on something of a roll, passing bipartisan legislation, confirming nominees — and potentially isolating House Republican leaders who have made Senate inaction a centerpiece of their political appeals.
By big bipartisan majorities, the Senate since March has passed legislation to overhaul the postal system, pay for a multiyear transportation program, renew the Violence Against Women Act, streamline drug approval rules at the Food and Drug Administration, extend the life of the Export-Import Bank and ease financing for business start-ups. It has confirmed 19 judges and has put the Federal Reserve Board at full strength for the first time since 2006.
When the House has taken the lead with bipartisan deals like the ones on the Export-Import Bank and the business start-ups, the Senate has promptly taken up the House bills and sent them to the president. The same cannot be said for the House on high-profile measures like the Violence Against Women Act and the transportation financing, which the House rebuffed in favor of more partisan versions.
On the others, the Senate has led, pressuring the House to find bipartisan common ground.
“The rap has been that we’re at partisan loggerheads, but we’ve had one of the most productive last six weeks in a very long time,” Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, said just after the body passed the broad F.D.A. bill, 96 to 1. “We’re coming together, and it’s not just naming a post office. This is serious stuff.”
Even Republicans are speaking with a sense of pride.
“It’s actually pretty reassuring,” said Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas. “When the Senate’s allowed to work without the minority getting jammed, when people can offer amendments, have debates, then vote, then there’s the opportunity for bipartisan collegiality and, you know, progress.”
But Mr. Cornyn, a top political strategist for his party, also said that “we’re very conscious of the fact that we don’t want to undercut our House members.” But the House Republican attack line against a do-nothing Senate may be fading, along with excuses for not getting more bills to the president’s desk.
Still, on what Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, calls the “mega-issues,” the Senate is nowhere. On those, President Obama and House leaders have made common cause in emphasizing the negative. In Iowa on Thursday, the president hammered Congress for failing to extend a tax break for wind power, and he has pointed to other issues that are still stuck, like legislation to subsidize student loan interest rates.
Senate Democrats have not tried to pass a budget blueprint in three years. By contrast, House Republicans have passed two long-range plans that would drastically shrink the domestic side of the government and fundamentally transform entitlement programs like Medicare and Medicaid. This month, the House took the first step to replace across-the-board cuts to defense scheduled to begin next year with more cuts to domestic programs and to aid for the poor.
But House leaders have relied on partisan muscle, not bipartisan outreach, to lay those markers. The House budget blueprint and the legislation to shift defense cuts to other programs passed without a Democratic vote. The House’s version of the Violence Against Women Act passed on May 16 with six Democratic votes, or 3 percent of those present. The Senate’s version passed three weeks earlier with votes by 15 Republicans, a third of those present.
The Senate passed a two-year transportation program in March with 22 Republicans in support — or more than half of those in the chamber. The House has yet to pass a multiyear plan. House leaders did pass a temporary transportation measure that included a statutory approval of the Keystone XL pipeline, which Mr. Obama has blocked. That bill attracted 69 Democrats, or 38 percent of those present.
“I’m not going to argue there’s a change,” said Michael Steel, a spokesman for the House speaker, John A. Boehner of Ohio, “but they’re catching up to what the House has been doing all along.”
The Senate has yet to take up 17 bills passed by the House that are framed by Republicans as job-creation measures, including bills to stop new Internet, coal and cement regulations and to remove land-use restrictions on 32 acres in Accomack County, Va.
But on average, those bills passed with 21 Democratic votes, 11 percent of the party’s total.
Six major bills passed by the Senate since March averaged 28 Republican votes, 61 percent of those available. (Senator Mark Kirk, a moderate Republican from Illinois, has been out recovering from a stroke.)
Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican who recently lost a primary to a candidate condemning compromise, said the Senate was starting to operate as designed. Bills have been passed after committee deliberations, cross-party negotiations over amendments and procedures, and “a lot of time just visiting with each other.”
Don Stewart, a spokesman for Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, was still holding political votes on some high-profile legislation that were designed to fail — like a bill on student loan interest rates paid for by closing a tax loophole, or a measure to impose a minimum tax rate on millionaires. But for now, at least, there are more serious legislative efforts.
With elections looming, that might not last, Mr. Stewart warned. After a weeklong break, the Senate will come back to vote on a quickly assembled measure to guarantee pay equity for women and men. It will fail.
