

                    WASHINGTON -- Out on the campaign trail, President Obama talks about Medicare (Republicans would gut it), tax cuts (Mitt Romney wants to give them to rich people like himself) and Osama bin Laden (Did you know? He's dead.).        

                    He even talks about the unemployment rate (it is still too high, but job growth has increased 30 straight months after the economic mess that greeted him when he took office). And he talks about Congress (lawmakers should get moving and pass his jobs bill).        

                    But what the president never talks about is getting more of his party members elected to the House and the Senate. And, for that matter, neither does Mr. Romney.        

                    It is the survival of the fittest on the presidential campaign trail these days. With a close election expected and a dog-eat-dog fight for swing states, who has time to spend stumping for other politicians? Certainly not the president or Mr. Romney, despite the stakes in this year's Congressional elections.        

                    Instead, each is focused on his own fate. Unlike the 2010 midterm elections, when Mr. Obama campaigned heavily for Democrats all over the country, this year he is focusing almost exclusively on the eight swing states where his own political fortune is believed to be up in the air: Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire, Ohio, Virginia and Wisconsin.        

                    So if you are a Democrat running for office in one of those states, you might have a small chance of getting some help from the top of the ticket. Tim Kaine, a former Virginia governor running for Senate, sometimes campaigns with the president on his too-many-to-count trips to Virginia, a crucial swing state.        

                    In Mr. Romney's case, perhaps he is cognizant of the abysmal Congressional approval ratings and sees no gain in associating himself with a branch of government that so many Americans think is dysfunctional and ineffective.        

                    And campaigning on behalf of members of Congress could risk alienating swing voters, many of whom seem to prefer bipartisan government and dislike one-party rule.        

                    That is not to say that Mr. Romney keeps Congressional Republicans at an arm's length. In fact, his campaign stops over the last week or so have featured a few notable members, including Speaker John A. Boehner and Senator Rob Portman of Ohio, who appeared with him at a rally in Cincinnati, and Representative Peter King of Iowa, who introduced him at an event near Sioux City.        

                    But even then, there is little talk of Republican domination at the polls in November. Mr. Romney instead likes to pile on the praise, saying this member or that is a ''great congressman'' or the kind of person ''we need in Washington.''        

